TITLE: This type of essay turns normal experience into valuable writing
DATE: 20250826
URL: https://youtu.be/DkigGUpCR1I
SOURCE: en-orig

Is the fear that readers won't care about your life stopping you from writing online? Well, for the students in my creative non-fiction writing seminar, the answer is yes. They enroll in the course thinking, who am I to write? My life is pretty dull. And what professional experience I've had, there are already experts writing about it. But that all changes after writing just three essays. So, in this video, I'm going to show you why you don't need to be a real writer to start writing creative non-fiction. how your boring life is actually perfect writing material and how you can use your experience to write non-fiction that stands apart from the naval gazing journal entries that we see online by providing real value to readers. And we're going to do that by looking at an example of a creative non-fiction essay that all my students read at the start of the semester. By the way, if you're new here, my name is William. I'm an English professor and I help non-fiction writers write well. So, if you want to learn more about the art and science of expert writing, be sure to grab my free newsletter, Writer Science. Link is down below the like button. And so, to begin, I think what we need to do is understand what we mean when we talk about creative non-fiction. So, imagine an axis that goes from creative to non-creative and fiction to non-fiction. So, up here in creative fiction, you have basically what you would expect whenever you think of creative writing. You know, we have literary fiction, avantgard and sci-fi. And the goal of this kind of writing is innovation. Like we tell stories, but ultimately the reason that this genre works of creative fiction is that even though those stories are in a sense made up fictions, they touch on something deeper. We watch these dramas because they tell us something more universal about the human experience. And then going down here to non-creative fiction. Well, that would be genre novels. So, so think about like those Harley Quinn romances, uh, detective novels, young adult fiction. On Amazon Kindle these days, there's a lot of like romance novels and other genre fiction that people just buy for 99 cents and just fly through. So, this kind of writing really focuses on reproducing familiar patterns that that readers are familiar with. And then going over here to non-creative non-fiction that is you know think journalism academic reports memos and instruction manuals. So the the goal here in this kind of writing is just plain English plain information transfer right factual and functional. But then moving up to creative non-fiction. This is the sweet spot where we're writing about non-fiction. So, it's anchored in reality, but like creative fiction, we are aiming beyond the facts. We're trying to touch something deeper, something true, something universal that will provide readers real value. Because the fact is that a lot of people who write about their experience online, we see that a lot on Substack these days. They're not, it's anchored in reality, but they're not aiming beyond the facts. And so a lot of these pieces turn into unfortunately glorified journal entries. And that's the reason that a lot of them don't get read is that readers don't perceive any value in it beyond the facts. So, learning the art of creative non-fiction is really about using events from your real life as the stuff like the raw material of something more creative, something more transcendent, something deeper, something true, something universally true beyond the particulars of the situation that you're writing about. And so, for an example of that, I want to show you this uh essay which I have all the students in my class read at the beginning of the semester. And the practice is that they'll read it and then they will write a response paper to this essay because that's the way the class proceeds is that every class will look at one student's piece of writing and everybody in the class will write that person a response paper. And so we practice that by looking at this which I think is an an excellent example of creative non-fiction. It's called Learning to Surf. It's by the writer uh David Guestner. And in general, the piece is about uh the author's experience moving to a coastal town. The author has just had a child. He's taken on a new job and he is there on the coast learning how to surf. At the same time, while he's out there on the water, he's observing pelicans. And so there are these uh three themes which we see introduced in the opening chapter. So like this not chapter there are sections which are um broken apart by these um by these waves. So there are about five or six uh sections but the first thing that I want to draw your attention to is the way that all the sections that follow all the ideas and threads that are developed throughout the piece they're all present in these opening three or four paragraphs. And so I'm going to spend uh closer time just kind of showing you this opening and then we'll go through the other sections a little bit more closely. But let's just read this opening uh paragraph together. So it says, "Out beyond the breaking waves, they sit there bobbing. Two groups of animals, aven and human, pelicans and surfers. As they rise and fall on humps of water, the pelicans look entirely unperturbed, their foot long bills pulled like blades into scabbards, fitting like puzzle pieces into the curves of their throats. The surfers, mostly kids, look equally casual. A girl lies supine on her board, looking up at the sky, one leg crossed over the other in an almost exaggerated posture of relaxation. For the most part, the birds and surfers ignore each other, rising up and dropping down together as the ocean heaves and then sides. So, um, you know, as the subheading gives us a clue, you know, this piece is really about stability. But you could have known that just by looking at this opening passage because although it's merely reporting on the facts, one thing to notice is like the features that the author is calling our attention to, right? Like you might have noticed the language that occurs throughout it. We see that the the animals out there on the water are unperturbed, right? The surfers also look casual. The girl is supine on her board, one leg crossed over the other in an almost exaggerated posture of relaxation and they ignore each other rising and dropping together as the ocean heaves and size. Now th this image, this opening image tells you everything that like it kind of everything opens up out of this image. And the fact that these features are what the author is calling our attention to is already giving us a sense of what we mean by creative non-fiction. The non-fiction is just a reporting of the facts. But the fact that the writer is kind of in a sense pointing the camera at these things and using these specific concepts to illustrate these things. like the fact that he notes they look casual, they're relaxed, they're dropping, rising up and down together as the ocean, the environment around them heaves and then sides. So this becomes a kind of opening metaphor for the rest of the piece and it tells us something about the writer. I won't spoil it yet, but it tells you something that these are the features that are interesting to the writer and these are the ones that he chooses to call our attention to. Now, similarly, another theme that's going to open up here is the way in which he links us to these animals, aven and human, pelican and surfer. And so, right away, we see the project of this piece. Now, this piece that we're looking at in particular, um it it it has a certain uh goal, which is to make readers see he's a nature writer, so he wants us to kind of identify with the natural world, and that's going to come about a lot. But um what we see at the beginning is that he's trying to tell us we're both animals, right? These pelicans and surfers, they're both they're different animals. They're joined in the animal kingdom and they're both responding to the environment with this kind of uh posture of relaxation. And right away at the beginning, I've circled them in green. And then um just down here as well, daughter is in green. So these are the characters in the piece. And this is excellent. It's like the opening number in a play or a musical or something where all the characters are being introduced. Now, we're going to see these pelicans again. We're going to see these surfers again. We're going to see his daughter again. And even the ocean becomes a kind of character. We learn that uh locals refer to the ocean as it. So then, you know, we drop into um a kind of dialogue here. When he goes to the cafe, the coffee shop, he hears the locals talking. What did it look like this morning? Right? The locals refer to it as it. The thing that I want to kind of draw your attention to in this opening is that right away we get all the characters and we get the the main themes. Like everything that we have in this opening section is going to be expanded upon and developed in all the subsequent sections. We don't get anything new that's not already contained in the germ of this opening. So that's what I love about this opening. We get the characters and we get all the opening themes. Now, I've circled this uh line here, fitting like puzzle pieces into the curves of their throats because it's also a way of setting up one of the other main themes in this piece, which is evolution. We're going to talk a lot about evolution as the piece goes on. And so, right away, we're given a clue about that. This this idea of the the their their bulls, sorry, their bills fitting into the back of their um um how do I say their uh the curves of their throat like puzzle pieces, right? that that's an image that you could associate with evolution and you know Richard Dawkins has in that book the the blind watch maker. So point here is that we're getting all these themes just um at the opening and then as we go through this kind of opening, right? We're we're we're in the coffee shop, we hear people talking and then we get our first reference. And so this is an important thing is like look at the way the writer is using this quote. Look at what's h the the the few select times the writer pulls in outside research, pulls in something from outside of the non-fiction reporting. Let's think a little bit about why and let's look at you know h how that works. So the first one we get here is this concept of functions lust and it comes from um you know this reference right here and it's a German word and we're given the definition of pleasure taken in what one can do best. So the surfers are practicing functions lust just like the pelicans. They're they're both in their nature and they're they're taking pleasure in what they can do best. And we're going to see that come up a little bit later. But but here I just want to kind of call attention to the select times that the writer brings in or or things from outside the non-fiction reporting. Why does the writer do it and how does the writer use that in the development of the piece? So we'll see functions less come up a little bit later, but right now it's um it's enough to just note that he uses it to describe the obsession that um the surfers have. And again, we see the crossover. you know, he's trying to link them to this idea of animals. And notice the swap here. He says that uh the surfers, their lives centered on being strong animals in their obsession. And these surfers must feel animal pleasure as they glide and weave through the water. And then we transition to the other character, the pelicans. When they lift off, they have even more impressive athletic feats. So the pelicans are like athletes and the surfers are like animals. So again, this crossover really serves the writer's purpose, which is trying to get us to identify with nature. And we're given a kind of introduction here. And one of the words that you're going to see used to describe the the pelicans is graceful, right? We're going to see that again and again. They're they're symphonic. Like it's it's good to just kind of look at the the choice words and concepts that the writer uses to illustrate our early understanding of these animals, right? We see rhythm, symphonic, graceful, they glide, effort, glide, effort. And he thinks that they're glorious. So, you know, we we see there's a way in which he there's something in the pelicans, in what he's noticing about them that he wants to emulate in his own life, and we don't quite know why yet. We know that he's just moved to this area, but we don't quite know why he's so interested in the grace of the pelicans, in the animal pleasure um that the the children find in in practicing surfing. But these are the things that he's noticing. And then we go into the next section, which I've labeled here weak stability because uh at the end there's a credit reporter. He he's applied for a loan for a car and he gets some bad news because he's told that he has weak stability. Now, do we honestly think that this is a factual reporting? Right? Did did the person from the credit agency actually call the writer and say, "Sir, you have weak stability, right?" Probably not. And and so that is one kind of artistic license that I think you have in this genre of creative non-fiction. It's not exactly necessary that everything is told. This isn't journalism, right? you're not ma you're not required to report on the facts and only the facts. But if we allow that this is a kind of um contrivance that he's made this up, we can think a little bit about why. And I think what this the the purpose that this serves like he probably did actually receive bad news about his car and that his credit wasn't very good. And he was probably told something to this effect, but he's taken poetic license here to term it weak stability because that phrase gives us such strong contrast to all the strength and stability that he's noted in the Pelicans and in the surfers. So again, I mean, I think I think you have artistic license in this genre, but it should always be to a certain purpose. And so in this section, we're learning more about the writer and we learn that he's tried to maintain a relaxed attitude, right? He wants to be relaxed and he notices that there is they're almost in an exaggerated posture of relaxation. He wants that relaxation in his life, but it's hard since he's moved to this island. Uh his home is Cape Cod, but now he's moved to North Carolina because he has a new daughter, Hadley, and he was lured. Right? Keep in mind that word lure is, you know, what we use whenever we're catching fish, just like the ocean. So, we're developing the the imagery here. There's there's still a kind of web of the the signification, the words that he's choosing to ex to um express this situation is still linked in this um kind of environment of the ocean. And so, he's lured in just like a fish of health insurance and a steady paycheck. and he found that irresistible. And so he's on the hook now. And the move has unsettled him. Look at all the words I've circled here as a point of contrast to the concepts that we saw up here. We saw relaxation, grace, glorious, symphony. These are all words of stability. And then in here, we're getting all these concepts that signal weak stability. Disorient, cry, fall apart, shaky, unsettled. And he at times he just wants to crawl into a cool dang place and lie there and be still, right? But he has bad news. Unconditioned car right now. It's like a kiln and he can't afford a new car because he has weak stability. He nods and considers the poetry of his words. Okay, moving on to the next section which I've labeled joy because again it's useful to like zoom out if we can like you know we want to look up close but then we want to look at these entire units. So we have this opening here you know where we've um we're kind of setting the scene. Then we get we we come in here and we start talking about weak stability. Okay. So now we see some tension. But then up here we have joy. This section that tells us a little bit like joy and it mainly focuses on his daughter. Right? So he has this new daughter which he calls a a squirming little ape-like animal and that uh walking with his daughter in a papooselike contraption on his chest. Papoose is the sling that the Algangquin used to use to um carry their their children. So again, he's he's linking this to the sheer animal pleasure. And then the second quote comes in. So again, all of these quotes, all the out anything that comes in from outside the kind of material reporting on the situation serves a purpose. And so here we have joy, right? Joy is the symptom by which right conduct is measured. And that comes from um thorough, right? So he says, "Okay, well, if that's true, then my conduct must be excellent because I feel joy and that must mean that I'm doing something right." So even though times are hard, things are unstable, he still feels joy when he's there with his daughter. And so he must be doing something right. It's not all that is wrong in the world. So ultimately, what this is bringing us to is that he just needs to learn to surf, right? There's all these uh vicissitudes in the water and he has weak stability. He knows he's in the right place, but he keeps getting pummeled by the waves. And so what he needs to do is learn to surf just like the just like the surfers, just like the pelicans. That's what he needs to embibe in order to kind of um move into this next phase of life. So moving the attention away from his daughter and the idea idea of joy. Now he's looking at pelicans. And we see some crossover between, you know, what he was going through with his daughter and what he notices here. the relationship between the firstear pelicans who are flying bellyto belly with their shadows. It's exhilarating to see the way they lift up and down, sink again on the crest of the waves. Eight more adult birds skim right through the valley between the waves, gliding by the surfers, sweeping upward before plopping onto the water. And so he again, he's looking at them and he's trying to bring in some of their qualities. And this is interesting. Notice how he says, "Feeling that it's only polite to get to know my neighbors, I begun to read about the birds." So, notice that he he refers to them as his new neighbors. And then this entire the rest of this section is just about some of the interesting things that he learns through his research. He's not going to educate us like a like a Wikipedia article as though he's an expert. Um, he he's telling us, well, I didn't really know a lot about them. And so, now he goes and does some of his research. And what does he find? He finds some interesting features about them, right? They're unintentional physicists. Just like the surfers, they have this kind of grace and and like brilliance about the way that they navigate uh the water. They go through their lives as near mutes. Um they always remain silent. Oh, and then he notices the formations that they fly in. All of this information, all of the the outside research, it's still couched in the unfolding of the narrative. Notice how all this research even at the top line right this research is conducted within the context of you know his just having watched the birds right he's with his daughter then he watches the birds and then he goes home and he reads about them and he starts bringing in some information and my books confirm what I have already noticed right and so then Hadley his daughter and I turn home and here they are again flying informations at no point does the author break from the narrative right he keeps our focus trained on the story that's being told but within the kind of representational space of that story the the details and outside research unfolds. So that's an important feature of non-fiction writing is we don't want to break apart from the story and just kind of introduce facts or quotes in a way that is kind of orphaned from the unfolding of the narrative. everything takes place within the context of the story that unfolds. And then going on to the next section, again, I I wanted you to note the way that he refers to them as neighbors because I thought this was interesting. So, take a look. This entire thing is all about his neighbors. Um, if you were to read through it line by line, you would notice that it stays focused on the neighbors. And then in the the opening of this next section, which I've labeled Taste of Balance, it says, "I'm not a good watcher." Well, that's not exactly true. I'm a pretty good watcher. It's just that sooner or later I need to do more than watch. So today I am floating awkwardly on my neighbor. So right away look at that. You read from left to right. So all of this is unfolding in time and you've just gone through four paragraphs which have you know which are about pelicans and at the top we're introduced to you as neighbors. And so now I am floating awkwardly on my neighbor. with Matt, we realized that we're back now in the human world. We're back in the surfer world. I don't know if this was intentional, but it really surprised me when I was reading it because I, you know, I I thought we were still talking about pelicans and now he's trying to float like pelicans. I'm not exactly sure. This felt quite abrupt for me and I I just thought that was quite clever, right? And now his his other neighbor Matt, it was interesting. But nevertheless, now we're in the section called Taste of Balance, right? We've just finished this section where we talk about joy, right? The joy that he he feels with his daughter and these features of the pelicans. And now we're in this section called Taste of Balance. And again, we're using this language of um you know, he's floating awkwardly. His legs are kicking frantically like egg egg beaters. And uh that's in contrast to the webbed feet of the um the pelicans which allow them to bob effortlessly in the ocean. This is his f, you know, his attempts at surfing. And then he scalds himself in the outdoor shower. There's shock when he finds himself riding on top of one of the very small waves. And then he's thrown into the waves of smashed about, but that is enough to get a taste of balance and a taste of stability. So again, zooming out, it it's it's helpful to see how the story unfolds from the opening, you know, going down to weak stability, but then there's joy. It's not all bad. And now he gets his first taste of balance. And now we drop into this evolutionary perspective, the one that um was signaled at the beginning of the piece when he talked about the bills fitting into their their faces, the back of their neck just so. And so he notes that the the pelicans look prehistoric. And what we'll find referenced throughout the piece is their rituals. And you know the their rituals of mating, their rituals of of um all kinds of kind of animal behaviors he refers to as rituals. And the reason he does this, we'll discover a little bit later, is because he wants to use that idea of ritual to explain where this disease in man comes from. He says we are detached from the rituals of evolutionary life. Right? the the pelicans are in sync with uh their evolutionary rituals and so that's why they're able to go through the the kind of rise and fall of the waves which such grace and he can't do that because as man he's now detached from it. So I just wanted to note how he's kind of setting that up, right? We're now switching our view from the kind of particulars of the situation to a more expansive evolutionary perspective and and and watch the use of that word rituals. And uh when he wants to get the history of the pelicans, he notes that early uh oranthologists, you know, people who were writing about the species, they had quite uh choice language to describe them. They called them grotesque and that they had like a quiet dignity and that they were stupid birds. Uh they had lubrious expressions, undemonstrative habits, and that they were more befitting for a funeral than any joyous display. And that even their pearls are a lustrous white. I've circled that because it comes up later. But what he's noticing here is that even, you know, in 1922 and even among more modern writers, this is the way that these birds are described. And that's great. He he almost takes this personally. It's kind of funny the way the writer gets upset about the way that they are um characterized as being preposterous because that never occurred to him. You know, here he is and he went buy them a sandbar and he laughed as he watched them waddle like Guliver among the Lilipushians. Um but ugly is just mean-spirited. So maybe they're a little bit awkward, but like they're not ugly because he's developed now such an affinity with these birds. You can see he develops kind of a grudge with those past writers. And so again, we see this language about rituals coming up. But he says that compared to our own erratic lives, the lives of pelicans appear consistent, reliable, even ritualistic, like they've been doing this for 30 million years. And he's he's calling our attention to this again, not to give us facts about the pelicans, but all of these details occur within the context of the story. So he says to himself, that's the kind of animal I am. I'm built for change. I'm built for adaptation. So the pelicans become a kind of mirror against which the author is fashioning himself. And you know the the entire even though we're learning a lot about pelicans, the narrative itself is about the author and his own adaptation to this new environment. You know he says long before we became dull practitioners of agriculture, human beings were nomads capable of surviving in dozens of different environments. So you know now and now we are beyond ritual. So without these primal guidelines of ritual we are left facing a kind of uncertainty on good day that on good days gives us a lot of options but on bad days gives us chaos. And he says although it's uncomfortable building a foundation on uncertainty it has the advantage of being consistent with reality. So ultimately what he's coming to is kind of like a Buddhist understanding of you know the nature of life like nature is like the ocean. It is change. There is no stability. This idea of weak stability like there is no stability but we have to build our foundation on that weak stability. We can't as humans we cannot build our foundation of um you know establishing oursel in the world with this understanding or expectation of consistency because life gives us exactly the opposite. And so he's trying to update his model, you know, understanding of the world. And the pelicans are what's giving him that kind of updated understanding. So he says that, then this is going to come up later. He says the best that we can do is to not make false claims for certainty and to try to ride as gracefully as we can on the uncertain. And so now we come in and we we we get him surfing a little bit and we get some observations of the transition from depression to joy through small achievements. you know, he's talking about the depression that he feels and he's already kind of identified um where that comes from. And then he calls back to this image of the girl that he saw right at the opening, the girl who had an almost exaggerated expression of a relaxation, right? He remembers back to her and now he's out there in the water bobbing upside bobbing up and down and he sees, you know, just with getting up on his board holding um oh his do thinking about his daughter getting up holding her own bottle and he feels the joy that these small achievements bring and that you know maybe she in her own way will um find her own functions lust whether that's surfing or something else. So his daughter becomes a way of developing this idea that joy comes from small achievements. And then he looks at the pelican and he notices that the pel this is so great. Okay, just I'm going to back up and do this again because this is great. So he notes that joy comes from small achievements. And again, this is not in the abstract. This is given to us as he's thinking about his daughter, right? She learns to hold up her bottle joy and functions lust. And then he looks up at the pelicans and he notes that they're leaning backwards in their posture right as they're flying above. They're kind of leaning backwards while they're looking down at the water. And then he remembers that uh his friend Matt told him that the reason he's not surfing well is because he's been putting too much weight his weight too far back on the board. So just like the pelicans, he copies their expression and he makes a little bit of progress. He gets up on a wave and he has a lot of joy. He lets out a hoot and he's laughing out loud. He's finally done it. And so again, joy from these small achievements and then he quits, right? In the next section, he quits. He introduces this new concept of habituation. And so he's been living there for some time now. Some time has passed. He's kind of used to the pelicans flying overhead. He's um given up on the uh surfing because he notes that, you know, on a biological level, novelty is vital to the human experience. But after a while, the novelty fades into habituation and he abruptly quits surfing because he decides that there's kind of danger in it. And now that he's become a father, right, he used to fear fatherhood, right? Earlier in the piece, he was really fearing fatherhood, but now he's become habituated to it. And now it's changed his his understanding of the world, right? He he now sees the way disaster seems to loom around every corner. disaster that might befall his daughter. And so he says there's no sense adding death by surfing to the list. This decision is also couched in this kind of understanding of human nature. You know, on a biological level, novelty is vital to the human experience. And he uses this I he introduces this idea of habituation here because it's going to play out in in the next section. Well, and so the second in the second to last section, we see novelty fading into intimacy. And the reason I put these headings at the at the start of each section is because it's important to understand like the function of each piece at the paragraph level, right? Every paragraph should have a single message, but then each of those messages should cohhere into a larger kind of macro pattern. And so that's what I've done here. I've kind of thought about what are the larger functions of each of these sections. And so you know here we have the last section but just before that we have a kind of observation of how novelty fades into intimacy right and that the pelicans become an image of parental self-sacrifice. So he draws our attention again to the ritual of mating um the actual the we we see that twice and of course he's going to see part of himself in in those rituals being an unearly father. And that's that's setting us up for the next section because we're going to go to their mating grounds in just a moment. But he reminds himself that this kind of uh sympathy that he feels for these birds itself has an evolutionary purpose. Right? You might it might be considered sentimental by some maybe anthropo anthropomorphizing the pelicans, right? Seeing human qualities in them, but what he sees in the pelicans and what many people uh before him have seen is this image of parental self-sacrifice. So he goes through kind of early uh uses of pelicans in mythology and he finds that early like in the Bible pelicans are used as both a symbol of parental self-sacrifice and on a grander scale the sacrifice of Christ. And it turns out that that's based on a kind of misunderstanding of their nature. He he mentions that at one point but even later in Shakespeare the image of parental self-sacrifice is reversed. So in King Lear, he calls his daughter those pelican daughters who who betrayed him. So we get these kind of external references and this is a kind of like slow point in the story, but it's setting up the next piece which really hits everything home. And so the next section, the final section, we get the year culminating in a single day when somebody from the Ottabon Society takes him out to an island where the their mating grounds, the mating grounds of the pelicans. And this is significant because if you think about it, this is the first time in the story that the setting has changed. Every, you know, we begin when he's arrived in this new village and every scene so far has taken place there on the coast. Either he's in the water or he's on the beach looking at the water. And so just now for the first time, he's leaving all of that behind. He's being taken by somebody from the the Ottabon Society to explore their mating ground. So he's leaving behind his his the familiarity, his family and everything. and is going to this new environment. And so they go to four islands and he, you know, he he calls back to those old naturalists who called, again, he's really kind of worked up about that. So he he, you know, reminds us that they called them undemonstrative and legubrious, but I'll go with calm. In fact, while we're anthropomorphizing, I might as well put Buddhaike in front of calm. It's hard not to project this on them after experiencing the wild defensiveness of the term colony. And so he's he's linking them to Buddha. And I mean just go back to this observation. The best that we can do is not make false claims for certainty and to try to ride as gracefully as we can on the uncertain. I mean that's practically a quote from Buddha. So we see the way that early observations are now being manifest in this image that he gives us of Buddha. And that image of Buddha does some other work too because of course in Buddhism there's this idea of you know no beginning and no ending kind of continuous cycles of birth and rebirth. And so that's exactly what we get there because he's watching these eggs hatch and he references the hope and precariousness, the danger and growth, how they all go hand by hand and as a father something that he knows well. And then this next paragraph really hits home the thing that he was setting up at the beginning. Right? The idea that both surfers, humans, and pelicans are animals. And he says, "I'm not exactly sure what I gain from interwining my own life with the lives of animals, but I enjoy it on a purely physical level. That's that functions lust." So this move of linking the animal world with the human world to kind of reflect to develop our understanding of one through the other that is his as a writer his functions less. And he notes that our understanding of DNA undermines the myth of our species uniqueness. We are animals. And in this piece in particular, that's the thesis. That's what he really wants to drive home is that we are animals and that when we pretend that we're something better, we become something worse. Now, of course, not every creative non-fiction piece is going to share this same thesis, but we see as a natural writer, that's what he wants us to see. And suddenly it starts to make sense why he's he's spent so much time using pelicans as point of reflection for our understanding of human experience. And we see now, you know, this this term returns habituation and that that is the the person who took him out to this island must be habituated to it. But now that they look at some of the eggs that are hatching, they look anything but lusterless as those early naturalists write. And finally, he notes that watching these eggs hatch, you cannot think about death. Not right now. All you can think about is beginnings. And of course, any idiot can say can see that it's the beginning of something. But what we may what may be harder to see is that it's also the great and epic continuation. So we get both of these time scales in this piece. We get the local kind of experience of up and down, birth and death, stability and instability. But when we zoom out and we look at the evolutionary perspective, what we see is a great and epic continuation. And so writing about personal experiences this way is really the the power of creative non-fiction. You know, a lot of uh writers or people who want to start writing feel like they can't start writing because they're not real writers and that their lives are too boring for compelling content. But when you think about this story, like it's a very straightforward story of a man learning to surf, but he's just probed into these experiences a little bit deeper. He's not some Shakespeare inventing dramas. He's just looking at the dramas of his own life a little bit more closely and trying to draw out something transcendent about them. So this problem of not having an interesting life, well, creative non-fiction flips that. Your ordinary experience is exactly what others need to read about, provided that you know how to use writing not just to express yourself, but also to help readers understand the world differently and solve problems. So watch this video next because it's going to let you in on my writing system that'll take you from start to finish to write and publish your first piece of valuable content. So be sure to go check it out.
