TITLE: I’m an Editor, these are the 7 First-Draft Mistakes I Fix All the Time
DATE: 20250924
URL: https://youtu.be/bBg7GyIfn0A
SOURCE: en-orig

These are the red flags that tell readers and editors that you don't know what you're doing. Because good writing is like good design. When it works, it's invisible. But once there's a problem, it's all your readers can see. And it undermines your credibility and your entire message. So, in this video, I'm going to reveal the seven mistakes that I always come across in the first round of feedback on essays and other non-fiction so that you can just skip the writing consultation and edit it yourself. And don't worry about taking any notes because I'm giving you my sevenstep diagnostic checklist. It's the one I use with all my clients whenever we're reviewing their work. But you can just have it for free so you can just print it off and tape it up on your desk wall. But first, to understand what a big change this new way of editing is, you need to understand what I call the coffee stain problem. So, imagine you've written a first draft and now you're looking it over, checking for mistakes and improving the writing before you publish. As you're revising, you knock over your coffee cup and stain the page. From this point on, that coffee stain is going to remind you of that time and place, but it won't mean anything to your readers. And that's exactly what happens with the old way of editing. Your words are like coffee stains that only make sense to you. I mean, think about it. When you were writing those sentences, you were trying to express an idea that you already had in your head. So naturally, when you see those words again, they are going to trigger the memory of that idea. So the problem here is that this is association, not communication. If you actually want your writing to make it off the page and into the mind of your reader, then you need to know consciously what your readers expect intuitively. And that's what this sevenstep process is going to help you do. So without any further ado, I'm now going to show you my sevenstep editing system. And for the first part, if you've ever written something great, something you're really proud of and watched it underperform, this is for you. Because I have found the most common error that makes quality ideas flounder isn't with the writing itself. It's one step before that. It's with the person who's reading it. So, for example, imagine you had a friend whose pet died and another friend turns to them and says, "Oh, never mind. You can always get another pet." If you look at that sentence and you judge it based on the content itself, it doesn't tell you anything about whether it's a good sentence or a bad sentence. The point here is that writing is really weird. Like it's this solitary act. Okay, we sit alone in a room and we get these ideas and we try to express those ideas and it's this weird moment where we're using language which is social. Language is always social, but when we're writing, we're having to use it in this asocial situation. So, the first mistake that always happens is that writers lose sight of their readers. And if that advice sounds common enough, what I really want you to think about is not only who is your reader, but what do they want and what do they need? So, the advice here is to know your reader and not just your audience. What decisions are they trying to make? Like what motivated them to click on your headline, to read this article? What problem are they dealing with? What answer are they looking for? What decision are they trying to make? These four questions help you get a concrete profile of your reader. And whenever writers bring their text to me, I don't even look at it before answering these questions because you can't really make decisions about whether a text is successful. Just like the friend who gives the bad advice to the other friend whose pet died, you can't judge the success of an article based on the text alone. You need to know who it the text is responding to. And so these four questions give you a profile, a relevant profile of your reader. Now, for the second point, believe it or not, your most important ideas are often dying a slow death in the place where readers least expect to find them. The problem here is that when you're writing valuable non-fiction, you're using the text differently than your reader is. All right? Writers use the text to solve a problem. So, what you do is you start off with a question. You bring in your evidence and you start to do the kind of intellectual work, working your way through it piece by piece until ultimately you come to a point of satisfaction, resolve, and that is when you stop writing. That's what we call writing patterns. But the problem here is that your reader doesn't use writing patterns. Your reader uses reading patterns. And if you don't know how to fix the text to match their reading patterns, you cause interference, which means you basically make the reader have to dig through a pile of information in order to find the ideas that they're looking for. So either you're creating more work for them or they're just going to abandon the text altogether. But when you fix this, you make it a lot easier for readers to know immediately whether your piece is worth their time. And even speed readers and skimmers are going to get your message. For an example of this difference between writing patterns and reading patterns, imagine that you're at a restaurant and your friend calls you asking for directions cuz they're going to come and meet you. What do you tell them? Well, if you're like most writers, you're going to describe your own route. You'll say something like, "Well, I started from my apartment, went down Fifth Street, hit some traffic near the mall, took a detour through the residential area, and then finally found parking two blocks away, and walked over." Now, no grammar mistakes in that passage. A+ if you run it through Grammarly. But does it work? Well, that route only works if your friend is starting from your apartment. But if they're coming from across town from their apartment, then this passage is completely useless to them. And the thing is, your writing works exactly the same way. When you're writing, it's an extension of your thinking. So your best ideas usually come at the end after you've worked them out. But you can't just give that to readers. When you bury your main point at the end or in the middle of your paragraph after walking readers through your entire thinking process, you're giving them your route to the restaurant, not theirs. So, in a different context, instead of writing something like, "After analyzing market conditions, reviewing competitor strategies, examining consumer trends, and evaluating financial projections, I recommend we launch the new product line." You could try something more like this. We should launch a new product line. Here's why. Market conditions are favorable, competitors are vulnerable, consumer trends support it, and financial projections show strong returns. In the first version, readers have to follow your entire intellectual journey before discovering whether it was worth their time. But in the second version, they immediately know your destination and then they can decide whether they want to take that trip with you. So, the point here is to lead with the main point. How do you do that? Well, whenever you're reviewing your draft, look for the one sentence that you need readers to accept, act upon, or use. Usually, you'll be able to find that at the end of the text because that's where you usually discover it. Other times, it can be buried in the middle of a paragraph somewhere. But the point here is that when you find it, you need to move it to the end of your introduction, not the conclusion. Because reading is a time investment. So in your professional writing, readers need to know what your point is immediately before they decide whether they're going to invest the time in the rest of the passage. So when you put the main point first, not last, you create the right expectations. But it's not enough to just put your ideas where your readers expect to find them. Because honestly, readers don't care about your ideas. They care about their problems. Many writers make the mistake of giving readers information that they didn't ask for instead of solutions to problems that they have. This is when readers think to themselves, why are you telling me this? So, to see how this plays out, imagine the following situation. Let's say that you need to write an op-ed and your goal is to convince university administrators to control the campus squirrel population. These squirrels have been running a muk. You know that some readers are going to resist this idea. So, here's how most writers would start. Most students think the squirrels are adorable. However, we need to control the squirrel population. All right. What just happened here? You basically said, "I know, I know you love these fluffy creatures, but we're going to get rid of them anyway." And your reader's thinking, "Oh, great. Another squirrel killer, and now they're going to reject everything you say." So, you try again with the following opening. Most students think squirrels are adorable. However, our study shows 70% of campus squirrels carry viruses. Well, that's better, right? Wrong. because now your reader is thinking, "Okay, squirrels are adorable and they carry viruses. So what? They're still cute." In other words, you haven't actually challenged anything that would prevent them from rejecting your proposal. But what if you tried an opening like this? Most students think that adorable squirrels are harmless. However, our study shows 70% carry viruses communicable to humans. Now you're getting somewhere. You're speaking directly to the squirrel lovers and you're addressing their concerns and showing them that there's something missing or misguided about their beliefs. So, what's the difference here? Your reader thinks that squirrels are cute. They are resistant to your idea that we should get rid of them. So, in the first version, you ignored their resistance. In the second version, you gave them information that didn't address their resistance. But in the third version, you identified the specific belief that's actually standing in the way of your solution and you dismantled it. So this third version is an effective introduction because it sets up the right motivation. So here's how you can use your introduction to create that kind of motivation for your readers. Start with a problem that your readers recognize. Do not begin with background information because ultimately what we're trying to do here is to frame your ideas as the solution to a problem that matters to your readers. Okay? We don't just want to give them information. We want to give your idea in the context of a problem that they care about. So how do you get them to care about the problem? It depends on your reader. And in this case, you basically have three kinds of readers. All right? Uninformed readers are people who don't know about the problem. So in that case, you're going to need to provide some background to help them see that problem and its stakes. A second kind of reader is an indifferent reader. Those are ones who know about the problem but just don't care about it. And so in that case you present them with the problem but you need to establish the consequences of not solving that problem and make those consequences directly relevant to that reader. And a third kind of reader is a resistant reader. And so in that case they know about the problem they know about your solution and they don't like your solution. So in that case you need to speak their language. All right? So you want to acknowledge their position and then present that position in a way that makes it seem less stable for them. So they recognize some inadequacy or something missing or something broken with their current position. So that way they perceive your ideas as something that will make their position more stable. Now that you've got them through the introduction, you still need to help readers move through your key ideas. But honestly, if you want to make your essay easy to follow, there's a simple writing hack that I can't believe nobody else is talking about. I've seen a lot of writing teachers online tell writers to avoid repetition and redundancy and instead to use variation. And I don't know where these people are getting this information. It sounds like something from our grade school grammar class. The problem with this variation is that it confuses readers either by introducing too many things at once or by using different words to refer to the same concept. That makes it really difficult for readers to follow. It makes your text feel scattered and unfocused. So whenever I explain this idea in my creative non-fiction writing class, I usually ask students to imagine their text as a play or a musical, right? one with characters on the stage, right? These writers are telling you to vary to to not repeat yourself, but that's like introducing all these different characters onto the scene. To the contrary, you want to limit your focus to only a few select characters. Really, you're going to have primarily one character. But when you're using this kind of variability, your text becomes incoherent. It becomes like a scene in a play that has all these different characters talking. And when you're sitting in the audience or when you're reading the words, like you can understand the words that are being spoken by the characters, but if you zoom out and consider the meaning of that scene as a whole, you can't really say what it's about. In a good play or musical, each of these scenes has a clear main character. And while there might be other characters coming in to interact with them, those are secondary characters and they're using to draw out different aspects of this primary focus. So similarly, in a coherent text, there's going to be a clear subject and the other characters are going to step in as concepts to help develop that subject through comparison and contrast. But at the end of it, there's no doubt in the mind of the reader what the passage is about. So in your non-fiction writing, the way to build coherence is through key terms. So most professional writing fails because it's about too many things at once. So if you want to make your writing coherent, then you need to make it about something specific and then stick to it. So So the way to do that is choose your section, you know, whether it's a paragraph or a section. Identify the major key terms that readers need to accept in this. Track these terms from beginning to end and use the same words or closely related synonyms. Now, when you come to the fifth point, we're now starting to clarify your text. And when people talk about clear writing, they're really talking about one thing. People talk about clarity in writing like it's this elusive thing or it's a god-given gift. But honestly, it's really just a matter of one simple sentence trick. And whenever you ignore this trick, readers have a variety of words that they use to describe this kind of writing, right? The writing is dull, passive, unclear, indirect, and abstract. But if you think about like if you look at these words, they're not very helpful, are they? All they do is they tell us the way readers feel when they read this sentence or this passage, but it doesn't actually tell us what's wrong with the writing. So when you ignore this sentence trick, it makes your writing sound detached and academic and your ideas sound theoretical and abstract rather than valuable and useful. But when you follow this principle in your writing, suddenly it becomes grounded in the real world. And this is what readers call vigorous, active, direct, clear, concrete. And to understand it, we're going to continue with the metaphor that we developed in the last section. This idea of being in the audience and watching a play or a musical on the stage. All right? If that's true, then at the grammar level, the subject in terms of subject, verb, object, the subject is the spotlight. It's what identifies the main character of the scene. Right? So, take a look at these two sentences. As a writing teacher, they're my favorite sentences. All right? So, we have the dog chased the cat and the cat was chased by the dog. Which sentence is better? There are honestly some writing teachers who will tell you that sentence one is better than sentence two. But I'm here to tell you that it all depends on what you care about and what you think your reader cares about. If you care about the cat, then sentence one is less valuable to you because it's shining the spotlight on something that you don't care about. Right? So, what we're talking about with this spotlight is this idea of focus. You want to focus on what really matters in your sentence. And so to create that focus, what you do is put the people, the companies, or even the concepts or ideas that your readers care about in the subject position of your sentence. And when you follow this principle so that you have a consistent element in the subject position across a series of sentences, it becomes a focus or point of view, a consistent place where the reader is looking. Like when you vary the subject across a bunch of sentences, it's like the spotlight is moving around. So ideally, you want to be intentional about what you put in the subject position and try to maintain consistency for as long as is necessary. Find the characters that your readers actually care about and put them in the subject position. But it's not enough to just have all these clear sentences laid out in a sequence. Because if smart people feel stupid when they're reading your writing, the problem isn't their intelligence, it's your writing. A big problem that I often find whenever I'm reviewing first drafts is that writers are making their readers work too hard to understand how the ideas connect with each other. Now, as an editor, I'll do the work to untangle this stuff and figure out how these ideas relate to each other. But in practice, what happens is readers give up before they even understand your ideas because processing your writing is just mentally taxing. But when you implement this simple step, your writing becomes effortless to read. Your complex ideas feel clear and logical, and readers can focus on your ideas instead of struggling with your sentences. And I think the best way to understand this is with the following joke from Jerry Stiller. &gt;&gt; All right, here's a joke. Okay, newly weds, they go straight from the ceremony into the limousine that's going to take them to the cruise ship that's going to take them around the world on their honeymoon. Suddenly, the husband says, "You know, sweetheart, I forgot to get condoms. It's a little too soon for us to start a family, don't you think? I mean, it's a it's a honeymoon." So, he tells the limo driver to stop off at the first drugstore. As he gets out, he says, "Oh, by the way, darling, do you need anything?" She says, "Yes, you can get me some Dramamine, you know, in case I get seasick, Melameir." So he goes in, he says to the guy, "I'd like the biggest box of condoms he got and some Dramamine." The guy looks at him and says, "Do you mind if I ask you a question?" He says, "Not at all." He says, "If it makes you nauseous, why do you do it?" &gt;&gt; And so the reason this joke works is because when you present two items side by side, readers automatically assume that there's some logical relationship between them. Right? This is known in linguistics, if you're interested, as Grace's maxims. Readers always assume that there's some logical relationship between two things that are presented side by side. So, if you don't specify that relationship, then they're not going to shrug their shoulders and say, "Oh, I guess there's no relationship." They're going to assume that there's a relationship, right? So, if you don't want to make readers guess how your ideas connect with each other, then there are two things you can do. One, you want to create clear logical bridges between your ideas. These are words like because, therefore, however, and although and these words or phrases, connectors show cause and effect, conditions, contrasts, comparison, etc. And second, you want to make sure that the actions are represented as verbs and not nouns. And combining step five with step six, now you have what are called cores, right? You have clear characters in the subject position and you've got clear actions in the verb. That's a core clause. And then you use these logical bridges to specify the logical relationships between those cores. And with this last step, you are not ready to hit publish yet because if you were to publish now, it would be like putting on a fancy suit and leaving your fly down. Sloppy presentation undermines your credibility. Now, nothing builds trust with a serious reader like a razor sharp dead to rights sentence. And nothing breaks that trust like typos and formatting errors. They make you look careless. And so, this seventh and last step is what you would normally think of whenever you think of proofreading, right? You're going to edit for mechanics, polish for professionalism. You clean up the grammar, punctuation, spelling, formatting. But you have to remember that this is the last step, not the first. Most people obsess over grammar, looking for mistakes when their writing serves no clear purpose for their readers. So, if you've completed the first six steps and you want to edit for mechanics, then all you really need to do is proofread for grammar, punctuation, spelling. Of course, you can use online tools for this, but I really don't think there's any substitute for a writer or an editor's keen eye for these things. Now, you also want to check for house style, particularly if you're submitting for publication in another journal. But even if you're publishing on your own platform, on a platform like Substack or something like that, there are certain conventions that aren't going to be written in any rule book, but that you want to reproduce in your text so that it uh seems appropriate within the genre. And of course, you just want to think about things like presentation online. That could be things like the the markup and the uh formatting of your web page. If you're publishing in print, then that's things like spacing, margins, you know the drill. But the point here is to make sure that you do all of this after you've solved these bigger problems of purpose and structure because most professional writing fails because it serves the writer instead of the reader. But if you grab the sevenstep checklist linked down below the like button, you'll be able to transform your ideas into writing that solves reader problems and delivers actual value. But in the age of AI, this kind of writing is a dying art. So to learn about my plugandplay system for writing without AI, watch this video next because it's going to take you from idea to manuscript with each step all mapped out with clear, actionable advice. So be sure to go check it out.
