TITLE: EXACTLY How to Create Flow in Your Nonfiction Writing
DATE: 20250529
URL: https://youtu.be/MtbfC3gQNNE
SOURCE: en-orig

Is the way you're organizing your sentences confusing your readers? As an English professor, I have found that AI writing tools have been creating some really bad habits. These writing tools will not make you a good writer. Learning to create flow in your writing will. So, in this video, I'm going to show you the simple yet powerful hack for writing that flows that nobody's talking about, including clear examples from the author David Foster Wallace, Amazon product reviews, and even the sports pages, because good writing is everywhere if you have the eye to see it. So, if you want an easy and completely new approach that transforms choppy writing into pros that flows, then all you need to do is remember a simple German proverb. Can you teach me to pronounce German? Hey, sorry about that, but I can only stick to English here. Now, in case your German is not as good as mine, let me break that down for you. And by the way, if you like learning about the art and science of expert writing, then hey, me too. Which is why I created the newsletter, Writer Science, where I share quick tips with a community of writers. Totally free. Link is down below the like button. At the most fundamental level, we writers have two goals. First, we want readers to understand what we've written. That's what we're talking about when we talk about clarity. And second, we want to tell them something new, something that they didn't know before. That's what we're talking about when we talk about value. So the question is, how do we make sure that every sentence is clear and actually gives the reader something fresh and valuable? When writers think about how to improve their sentences, they usually jump straight into grammar rules, or even worse, they just hand off their writing to AI. But the problem with perfect grammar and thoughtless writing tools is that they overlook something critical, the psychology of your readers. And when you learn reader psychology, you can write sentences that are clear pathways instead of convoluted obstacles. To understand how readers learn new ideas, let me give you a quick example. Someone once asked Elon Musk how he learns complicated things so quickly. Here's what Musk said. One bit of advice. It's important to view knowledge as a sort of tree. First, you make sure that you understand the trunk and the big branches, the fundamental principles. Only then can you add the leaves and the details because without a strong trunk, there's nothing for them to hang on to. Musk sees learning as building a tree of knowledge. Every new detail you learn is like a leaf that needs to be connected to a larger unified structure. And guess what? Reading works exactly the same way. Every time someone reads your writing, they need to see how the leaves of your new ideas fit with the branches and the trunk of their own tree of knowledge, which is kind of hard work. But when writers make that work easy, that is when readers can take in a lot of new knowledge without having to work hard to connect it to what they already know, that's what they mean when they talk about writing that flows. So, if you want your writing to flow from one valuable sentence to the next, then all you need to do is make sure that every sentence gives your reader two pieces of information. For the first part of your sentence, have you ever read something and thought, "I know this already. Why am I reading it? Boring." Or even worse, I have no idea what this means. In both cases, the sentence fails its only job. You just had one job sentence to inform the reader. A sentence is like a battery in a headlamp. It's got a positive charge and a negative charge. Now, this headlamp requires three batteries, which have both a positive and a negative charge. But what if you swap them around so that one battery had two positive charges and the other one had two negative charges? Well, it wouldn't work. Each battery needs to have both a positive and a negative charge in order for the headlamp to turn on. And that light is what happens whenever your sentence succeeds at informing the reader. I can't see. I'm blind. So, as I read to you these following sentences, just ask yourself which ones actually inform you, illuminating something new and valuable. There was a US election in 2024. Donald Trump defeated Camala Harris. In the 2024 election, Trump's running mate was J. Dance. Harris's running mate was Tim Waltz. In the 2024 election, Republicans took control of both the US Senate and House. In the 2024 election, Trump won 49.9% of the vote. Harris won 48.4%. In the 2024 election, Trump won 77,34,184 votes. Harris won 75,19,616 votes. Only two or three of those sentences really informed you, depending on who you are and what you already know. Some of you are more informed, so the sentences weren't very informative. Others knew less, and so they were informed. But the point here is that a sentence that gives only old information, it's like a closed loop. The reader understands it perfectly well, but it doesn't take them anywhere. Only sentences that contain new information succeed at informing the reader. But for the second part of your sentence, let's take a look at a new example. They have all new information, but which ones seem easiest to understand? 6566 666 Turnberry 777 W6566 N666 Turnberry Scotland 1977 TWW6566 JN66 Turnberry Scotland The Open 1977 Tom Watson 6566 Jack Nicholas 6666 6 Turnberry, Scotland. The British Open 1977. At Turnberry in Scotland in 1977, Tom Watson shot final rounds of 65 and 66 to better Jack Nicholas's rounds of 66 and 66 to win the British Open, golf's most venerable championship. Each sentence contains exactly the same new information, but only one or two are understandable. Why? Because the understandable sentences blend new information, which is the scores like 65 and 66 with familiar context such as Scotland, the Open, Tom Watson, Jack Nicholas. A sentence that gives only new information without familiar context is like a tile on a pathway that's disconnected from the others. In order to reach it, the reader needs to make a leap. Only sentences that contain some old information are easy for readers to understand. If your sentences are all old news, then your reader tunes out. If they're all brand new, then your reader gets lost. So to inform your reader, then here's how you can apply this principle in your writing. Always pair new complex information with something that your reader already knows. This balance between what's familiar and what's new, like the two ends of a battery, ensures that the reader stays engaged, understands clearly, and gets real value from each sentence. But how much old information do they need? And where exactly should we put it? To answer that, I'm going to sell you this pen. It's a great pen, and if the following description successfully informs you about why this pen is so special, then you are definitely going to want to buy one for yourself. But even more importantly, you're going to see the way that sentence organization influences reader psychology. For beginning and intermediate writers, an excellent pen is the Zebra F301, a very thin barrel of lightweight stainless steel. Steel direct from the renowned mills of Japan is at its core. And to provide extra durability and comfort, two major innovations are used in its outer construction. Two layers of reinforced plastic are securely molded to its barrel of steel for increased durability. A wrapping of textured rubber grip surrounds its two plastic layers for increased comfort. Most standard ink refills can be used with the F301. The Zebra F series refill functions best. However, all the standard lengths are included in the F301's size range, although the 5 to6 in range is easiest to obtain. Fortunately, any of six different colors can be ordered for the F301. So, did you buy the pen? No. Well, then clearly something went wrong. When writing fails to inform, it means either that the reader didn't get any new information or the new information wasn't clearly connected to what they already know. But the weird thing is that in our pen example, each sentence actually did contain both old and new information. So why didn't it work? Well, the problem wasn't the information itself. It was the order. It's like putting the batteries into the container backwards. You've got all the right information in there, but it's just in the wrong order. So now watch what happens when we keep the information in each sentence the same, but just change the order. So for the first sentence, we'll keep it the same as the original. For sentences two and three, we'll just flip them around. And then notice how this flip in sentence number three puts durability and comfort right at the end of the sentence. Now, we haven't mentioned durability and comfort before. So, that means we're putting new information at the end of the sentence, and that is setting up reader expectations. I mean, what do you expect to be at the start of the next few sentences? Bingo. Sentence 4 starts by mentioning durability, and the next one starts with, drum roll please, comfort, of course. So, the new information at the end of sentence three set reader expectations for sentences four and five. And those sentences began with old information linking back to sentence three. Moving on to sentence six. Now that we've gotten durability and comfort out of the way, we can link back up to the original theme and end this sentence by introducing a new concept, ink refills. In sentence 7, that sentence transition is meant to contrast this sentence with the preceding one. So, it doesn't really make sense at the end of the sentence. So, let's move it in between those sentences by moving it to the head of sentence 7. With sentences 8 and 9, they follow the same pattern. They start by linking back up to the super theme and end by introducing a new concept, lengths and colors. Since we read from left to right and since we learn new things by attaching them to what we already know, readers naturally expect familiar, that is old information first, followed by unfamiliar, new information. If we reverse this order, then readers have to constantly backtrack to make sense of what they're reading. The chains of reference between the ideas become like a plate of spaghetti with the sauce underneath. So, what's the solution? Well, it's simple. Always place old information at the beginning of your sentence, followed by new information. By the way, when you follow the old to new principle, you create what's called a clear focus where the beginnings of each sentence link back to a single entity, and that creates a coherent unit of discourse. This focus guides readers smoothly through your ideas, helping them understand how each new piece of information connects with the larger idea. Which brings us to a pretty boneheaded piece of writing advice. Never use the passive voice. Always prefer active verbs. The writing mavens online love to trot this one out. And it's even enshrined in that Bible of writing rules, the elements of style, which tells writers to always use the active voice. Of course, this is one of the most common corrections that comes up in people who use Grammarly and and similar software. And to be fair, the passive voice can create some problems. But if you know how to use it properly, then it can be a powerful tool for writing sentences that flow. And this is the really tricky thing about teaching the passive voice. As the author David Foster Wallace says, if you say to students, never use the passive voice, you're an idiot. Sometimes the passive voice is exactly what you want, but not all the time. And probably not more than 5% of sentences really need to be in the passive voice. This from a writer who got people to read a 1200page novel. He knew a thing or two about writing that flows. So what are those 5% of cases when the passive voice is exactly what's need to make writing that flows? Well, let's start by following the advice of the writing mavens. Shrunk and white. All these sentences use an active verb, but see if you can spot where it breaks the pattern of old to new information flow. The properties of decentralization, scarcity, and security make Bitcoin the most revolutionary currency on Earth. First, Bitcoin is the most decentralized form of money that has ever existed. Today, millions of people, from Silicon Valley billionaires to broke college students, use it for transactions. Because of the lack of central control on these transactions, Bitcoin enables transactions without a banker silently judging your spending habits. Each sentence puts the agent, now that's the technical word for the thing that performs the action of the verb in the subject position, which means they're a-okay according to shrunk and white. But look at sentence three. The active voice forces us to put the new, heavy, complex information at the start of the sentence and the old familiar information at the end. And that's what's so stupid about rules-based writing advice. They completely ignore reader psychology. One thing I always tell my students is that languages are organisms. They're always evolving to become more efficient, and they'll never keep a word or a grammar form that doesn't serve some purpose. And English has evolved to have the passive voice for exactly this situation. Since English has a fixed order of subject, verb, object, the passive voice allows us to arrange the sentence so that old information occurs at the beginning of the sentence in the subject position. So, if you're tired of rules-based writing advice from Wright and the other writing mavens, then here's how you can use the passive voice to make your writing flow. First, move the goal. Sorry for the technical language, but that's just the quick way to say the thing that receives the action of the verb. That's the goal. Move the goal to the subject position. Second, move the agent, that's the thing that performs the action of the verb, to the end of the sentence in one of these prepositional by phrases. Finally, insert the verb to be and switch the main verb to the past participle, which becomes the properties of decentralization, scarcity, and security make Bitcoin the most revolutionary currency on Earth. First, Bitcoin is the most decentralized form of money that has ever existed. Today, it is used for transactions by millions of people from Silicon Valley billionaires to broke college students. Thanks to the lack of central control in these transactions, Bitcoin enables transactions without a banker silently judging your spending habits. Old simple information at the start of the sentence, new complex information at the end of the sentence. Das is good. Which reminds me, I forgot to tell you the meaning of that German proverb. The one that perfectly captures the idea of writing that flows, which of course in German means a whale's vagina. Actually, I think the meaning is closer to the beginning and end, shake hands with each other. But old to new information flow is only one of a set of tools that you can use to hijack your reader psychology. So, if you want to learn three other principles for reader psychology, then you need to check out this video right here because it's going to show you how to use four writing hacks that readers love. So, be sure to go check it out.
