TITLE: I wish I knew this before I started writing online
DATE: 20251019
URL: https://youtu.be/iCaX5cZ6roo
SOURCE: en-orig

You've been writing essays wrong all along and it's thanks to one of the worst pieces of writing advice. &gt;&gt; That's right for yourself. What is the single worst piece of writing advice that you often hear? &gt;&gt; I I think it's it's the very common know your reader. &gt;&gt; Write about whatever you're interested in. Here's where that advice fails. It only works from the writer's perspective. I mean, think about it like this. We writers use writing as an extension of our thinking. We open up a blank document to work out a problem and the solution only comes at the end. But if we stop there, then we ship something that readers can't use. So write about whatever you're interested in is the writer's definition. It ignores the reader's perspective altogether. So in this video, I'm going to give you the reader's definition. One that's simple enough to write on a post-it note and useful enough to refer to every time you sit down to write. And here it is. An essay helps readers understand something better that they want to understand. Well, now let's break that down. For your essay to work, it must help specific readers, but many writers act like the particulars don't matter. They say, "I don't know my reader yet. I'm just getting my ideas down." Or, "It doesn't matter who reads it." And this kills your essay from the start. Here's why. Readers expect your essay to answer certain kinds of questions. For example, if you want to solve a crime, well, you don't write an essay. You examine evidence and you make a case about who done it. What's called an argument of fact. You write it in a report or a briefing, not an essay. But if you want to work out the meaning of art or decide the right course of action or argue that one politician should be the president over another, then you're out of the world of facts and into the world of values. These are arguments of judgment and these are what your reader is expecting to find in your essay. Essays deal with questions of good, bad, right, wrong, better, and worse. And unlike facts, this kind of knowledge isn't objective. It doesn't exist out there in some metaphysical sense. It exists only by consensus within a particular group of people. So, if the kind of questions that we deal with in essays are socially constructed, then getting clear on your reader isn't something you do after you write. Your reader is not icing on the cake. They're the batter. The structure of your argument, the conventions, the word choice, the references. It all flows downstream from your particular reading community. So, if you want to write a valuable essay, you need to ask valuable to whom? Now, some of you are already convinced about writing for specific readers, but you don't want to box yourself in. You want to be multidisciplinary, writing across two or more audiences, and that's fine. But this is like playing several games of chess at once. It doesn't absolve you from thinking about the particulars of each game. It just means that you need to think about multiple particularities at once. Now, for the second part of our definition, what if I told you that everything you've been taught about the purpose of essays is wrong? Because it is. If you go by what most writing manuals say, well, they say that the goal of an essay is persuasion. But that's wrong. The goal of an essay is to help readers understand. Think about it like this. An essay is a genre, and all genres exist to help their users get things done. which means that every genre has a goal, a function. So for example, the purpose of a white paper is to persuade stakeholders to adopt a certain position. The function of these genres is to persuade readers to act. And before you object, it is true that some writers do both. They improve understanding and they drive action, but the action comes second. And if you go chasing after the rabbit of action, then you risk failing to meet the primary function of your essay, which is to improve your reader's understanding. And for the third part of our definition of an essay, what would you say if I told you that I was quitting my job as an English professor to become an inventor? My invention, the world's first coaster camera lens. So when you're filming, you can use it to prop up a cold beverage. And whenever you're done, you can just pop it on the lens and voila, a new product. Well, you'd probably say, "Don't quit your day job, professor." But the way you are looking at me right now, like I've lost my mind and embarked on some insane project that'll never work. That's exactly how I look at writers when they tell me what they want to write about. Because many writers want to write about what they want to think about. They don't want to adapt to what other people want to think about. And look, I know that you don't want to hear this, but here it is anyway. You have to write about what your readers are interested in understanding. Now, look, I'm not talking about audience capture here. You're not about to become some slave to market demand or reader interests. And there are ways that you can shift your reader interest. There are certain techniques that we can talk about, but we can't talk about shifting reader interests until we address the biggest thing holding writers back, and that is self-centeredness. A lot of you are possessed by a vision of your favorite writer who, despite everyone's advice, persisted in writing about whatever interested them. They were passionate, stubborn, committed to their own inspiration. Readers be damned. And over time, enthusiastic readers found them. If you build it, they will come. And so with that vision, you want to do your own original research. Key word there is original. But writers who start this way always hit the same wall. They think that anything original counts as research. So if an idea hasn't been written about before, it must be valuable. Right? Wrong. So if you think that original ideas are automatically valuable, then you are imagining knowledge as a fixed puzzle with missing pieces. add a new piece and the value is obvious. And to be honest, that works for arguments of fact. So, for example, if you're examining a crime scene and you bring in some new evidence, well, that evidence is automatically valuable. But again, in essays, we are not dealing with arguments of fact. We're dealing with arguments of judgment. So, your idea is not like a missing puzzle piece. It's more of an invention that you're taking to the market. And so if consumers can understand it and they can use it to solve a problem, then they'll adopt it and reward you. And if not, then it stays on the shelf. And the same thing is true of your readers. If they can understand your idea and they find it useful, they'll adopt it and share it and they'll reward you. But if they don't see how it solves a problem that they care about, it stays dead on the page. In other words, your idea only becomes knowledge when readers accept it. But just because you say something new doesn't mean that it's valuable or even true. It only gains value when readers accept it as true. So I mean just think about the declining rates of reading around the world. And then ask yourself how much interest do you have to spare. Your readers do not even remotely want to spend their time reading about anything you're interested in. Now, yes, a great writer can shift what a community cares about, but that skill is rare, difficult, and pretty risky. Your essay succeeds when its topic aligns with something that readers already want to understand well. Sometimes, a good essay can make readers care about something new. But in the vast majority of cases, essays succeed when they advance understanding of something that their readers already care about. Something is not anything and readers are not you. And for the fourth part of our definition of an essay, readers decide what counts as better understanding, not writers. Now, notice what this definition requires. You need to know what counts as better. You can think of your essay like a set of directions. If your goal is to take the reader somewhere farther, you need to know their starting position. You can't give good directions without knowing where somebody is standing right now. And the same thing is true of essays. To help readers understand something better, you need to know what do they already understand? What do they want to understand? Where are the gaps in their knowledge? And this is why you cannot be agnostic about your reader and write well. Your essay is only good if it helps them understand something better. So the degree to which you help your reader depends entirely on how well you know them. They're the ones who decide whether your piece helped them understand something better. So your job is to know them well enough to meet them where they are. And for the fifth part of our definition, helping readers understand requires methods, not just good intentions. And before becoming an English professor, I studied meditation with a Buddhist monk. And he had a definition of love that I absolutely love, which is that love is the ability to help someone suffer less. And when he provided that definition, he really honed in on that word ability. Because you might recognize that someone else is suffering and you might have the intention to help them. But if you don't have the ability to help them suffer less, your intention is beside the point. You can actually harm them with your intervention. And the same thing is true of writing. It's not enough to intend to help readers understand something better. There's a specific skill set that you need to actually be able to help them. And that skill set is argument. Arguments are how we introduce new ideas. And every argument has three parts. So first there's a claim, which is a falsifiable statement about the way that things are or the way that they should be. Falsifiable means that somebody else could disagree with it. So the sentence water is wet is not a claim because nobody could possibly doubt it. It's just a definition. It's automatically true. But the sentence water is better than Gatorade for hydration is a claim because somebody somewhere could object. And the second piece of an argument is evidence because readers won't just accept your claim on its face. They want proof. And the key is knowing what kind of evidence your reader will accept as credible. Some readers want citations from authorities in the field or primary sources. Others will be convinced with a well-chosen anecdote. So what matters is that the evidence is something that the reader will find credible. And the third part is a warrant. You could think of it kind of like a reason, but it's more like a logical bridge connecting your evidence to your claim. Evidence doesn't speak for itself. Two writers can look at the same piece of evidence and reach opposite conclusions. You see this in climate science. Researchers might accept that temperatures are rising, but they develop different explanations to support different claims. So, claim, evidence, warrant. Master these three elements and you'll have the ability and not just the intention to help your readers understand something better. But to do that, you need to understand how readers actually read. what's happening in their minds as they move through your sentences. Now, most writers fall back on lists of writing rules. But I think there's a better approach, reader psychology, because when you understand what's happening in the reader's mind, you can adapt your pros to fit how they naturally process your writing. So, watch this video next because it's going to show you four proven writing principles based on reader psychology. Principles that will help you turn that definition into actual essays that work. So, be sure to go check it out. [Music]
