TITLE: The writing advice that's keeping smart people small
DATE: 20260423
URL: https://youtu.be/ED_LXx3Hzak
SOURCE: en-orig

What do the best writers at The New Yorker know that most experts don't? Many writers think that to write well, they need to dumb down their ideas. But, after 10 years teaching writing to scientists and engineers, I've found that the best science writing comes down to four storytelling principles that I'm going to show you in this video so you can steal them right away. Here's how Siddhartha Mukherjee uses them. Now, in case you don't know, Mukherjee is a cancer physician and arguably one of the best science writers alive. The article is called the science of identity and difference. It's about the field of epigenetics, about how genes get switched on and off. But, if that sounds boring, notice that the word epigenetics isn't actually in the title. It isn't in the opening. The article doesn't promise to explain epigenetics. The entire piece is driven by a single question, and that's the first storytelling move, and one that most writers skip. Most writers begin their essays with a topic, but writers at The New Yorker start somewhere different. In this article, Mukherjee could have written about a topic like genetics, and eventually he did, but it wasn't in an article, it was in a 500-page book, which just goes to show how bloated a topic can be. Now, he could have written about a more specific topic within that field, like the nature-nurture debate, or he could have written about his own family and how epigenetics fits in with that personal narrative, like a memoir. And that relates to epigenetics because his mother and his aunt were identical twins. Instead, Mukherjee picks one question that threads all these topics together, which is why are identical twins alike? Now, why does he start with a question? And why should you start your next essay this way? Well, when you begin with a question, it allows you to include things that would otherwise be considered digressions. So, in this article, using that question, "Why are identical twins different?" that allows Mukherjee to go into these vivid episodes about a researcher named Waddington and his politics during World War II. We learn about the hunger winter, which is when German troops banned food exports in 1944, and even lets him include an episode about experiments on a cast system of ants. And this is quite a mosaic of episodes, but the point is that in any other article, these would be considered digressions because they don't clearly relate to the topic of epigenetics. But in Mukherjee's article, they stay in the piece because each one helps us answer the question. A topic gives you a pile of things to say, but a question gives you a reason to say them. And when you're writing nonfiction, especially about abstract subjects like science and ideas, then you can try this approach. So, for example, if you're writing about climate policy, then you've got a topic. But let's say you write about why a certain town voted against solar panels that they had paid for. Well, now you've got a question. And that question can become an interesting article. But if all you've got is a topic, then what you're going to write is basically a Wikipedia entry. But when you switch the focus of your article from a topic to a question, there is a downstream consequence that you don't want to miss. Unlike a topic, a question forces you, the author, to make judgment calls. And we see this with Mukherjee explicitly. Where is this scene? So, it's in this part of the article where he's going over recent debates about whether trauma can be inherited through epigenetic changes. This is the whole idea that, you know, if your grandmother was traumatized, then you can inherit that trauma through your genes. And what's interesting in the telling of this story is that in this part, after covering that debate, the author, Mukherjee, steps forward and tells us that these claims should invite skepticism. In fact, he calls them fantasies, which is pretty loaded language. Now, Mukherjee is a doctor, so of course he's allowed to say this. We trust him when he says this, but you might not have that kind of credential, and that's fine. You can back up these judgment calls by interviewing somebody else who does have credibility in the field, but the point is not to skip the judgment. All stories have their own moral universe. They're a little bit like the Marvel universe. There's an interior logic to the piece, and a story without judgment is not a story. It goes back to same problem of being just like a Wikipedia article, which simply transmits information without making any value judgments. Narrative-driven articles like those in The New Yorker are not objective reporting. They're colored by value judgments, like all good stories. And speaking of stories, don't you hate it when movies try to deliver too much exposition? I notice this a lot in biopics and historical dramas. It came up just last night when I was watching The Social Network, but it's something I notice in a lot of biopics like Bohemian Rhapsody. The genre of these historical movies kind of force the writers to cram in this information, and of course they try to be sneaky about it and couch this exposition in dialogue, but it just never works and it feels so tedious. Well, the same thing happens in a lot of nonfiction writing. And watch how Mukherjee sidesteps this exposition problem with the second storytelling technique, which is all about using the foreground and the background. Now, the instinct when you know a lot about something is to put that information up in the foreground. You want to teach it. You want to give definitions, give background information, and explain things. And trust me, as an English professor of 10 years who's now developing his craft on YouTube, this is something that I have had to learn the hard way. Now, they're not there yet, but one day I might be brave enough to make public my earliest videos. So, if you want to see how bad those are, be sure to subscribe. But trust me, your audience does not want you to explain, define, or teach to them. What they want is for you to, of course, show them. So, it's that old cliché about show, don't tell. But Mukherjee uses a very specific technique, which he borrows from cinema to achieve this. Now, just watch how he shows you what a histone is. So, a histone, in case you don't know, is in this article, it's a really load-bearing idea. And you genuinely need to understand what a histone is in order to follow the science. So, to explain this, Mukherjee does not break from the narrative. He keeps the teaching embedded in this scene, which occurs um in a conversation between Mukherjee and a research scientist named Alice. So, here he is telling us about Alice's research. And he says, "By the mid-1990s, Alice had found an important clue. Genes are typically carried in long, continuous chains of DNA. One such chain can carry hundreds thousands of genes. But a chain of DNA does not typically sit naked in animal cells. It is wrapped tightly around a core of proteins called histones." To demonstrate, Alice stood up from his desk, navigated his way through the stacks of books and papers, and pointed out a model, a long plastic tube cerulean blue, twisted sinuously around a series of white discs like a python coiled around a skewer of marshmallows. A python coiled around a skewer of marshmallows. With an image like that, you will never forget what a histone is. So, notice what happened here. We're not provided a definition of the term. He doesn't break from the narrative flow like like a narrator hovering over everything to explain. The story continues, but we're just given this jarring moment when the scientist stands up, walks across the office, and points at a physical model. And the author, Mukherjee, who's Indian, colors it with his own interpretation. I mean, it really takes an Indian writer to think to describe a histone as being like a python, but that's how the information arrives. So, when Mukherjee wants to explain a histone, he does not dumb it down. He trusts his readers, and skillfully, he gives us an image that we can grasp, which does a lot more work than even a few paragraphs of explanation. And what I really love here is that the writer wasn't afraid to choose this unorthodox explanation. I mean, this explanation is so idiosyncratically his. Very few writers would have ever come up with an image like that. It's an image that's colored by his own subconscious and his own experiences, and it really works. It's a gift that only he could have given us. But this principle about using the foreground and the background is not primarily about using visual language and metaphors. No, it's about deciding what do you put in the foreground and what do you put in the background? What belongs there? So, more than coming up with vivid metaphors, the principle of the foreground is to put things there that you have personally seen. Like, who did you talk to? What did you see in the room? Is there a prop? Is there some aspect of the office that gives us some clue about the character of the person you're talking to? What does the person's face look like? And does that reveal something about their own hidden judgments or character? What I mean here is that we're not just throwing in visuals for the sake of it. Everything should contribute toward our understanding of the question that we talked about in the previous point. But, the idea is to put those visual, relevant elements in the foreground. Now, in the background, that's where you put primary research, which is the papers that you read, statistics, historical contexts, background information, definitions. Put that in the back. And I stress this not because many writers reverse it, but because many ignore the elements that they should be putting in the foreground. What I mean is, many won't do the in-person reporting at all. So, in the foreground, all we have is research and ideas and information. But, Mukherjee never does this. Even when he's teaching you about genetics, there's still a scientist in the room, standing up, walking across, and pointing at a model. The information is being transmitted through the medium of a story, and we never break from that story for the sake of exposition. And really, a well-rounded nonfiction piece draws its material from three sources: research, interviews, and reporting. So, many writers treat research as the most important thing, and they never leave their office. And the other stuff, if it exists at all, is just window dressing. But, in the age of AI, this is the least important part of your writing. Research and information is essentially free. Your readers can get the research themselves, but what they cannot get is you in the room noticing the stacks of books, the model on the desk, and the images that you choose to describe it. That's the value of your writing, and the research is just there to support it. And now for the third point, we need to think about the reader's experience of the text because you and the reader experience the text in fundamentally different ways. The writer has a god's eye view of the whole thing. You already know the story, you did the research, you did the interviews, you have the experience, you are looking at your text from above as though you're looking down at a map, but your reader has none of that. Your reader's experience of your text is a lot like somebody trying to use a map to get from one place to another from the beginning of the piece to the end, and they walk along that path one sentence at a time with no idea what's coming around the corner. Now, that blind spot between how you see the piece and how they experience it is where a lot of nonfiction writing falls apart, and the fix here is to structure your piece in time because time is the dimension in which effective writers can set up payoffs. And so, watch how Mukherjee does this. The piece opens in Delhi in 1942 when his mother and his aunt were born, then we go to the '70s when he was a child and interacting with them, and then uh from there we go to the present moment when this research scientist David Allis is running his lab, then we go back to the 1940s and we learn about Waddington in the early days of epigenetics, and then we are back to the present moment, and then we go back to 1944 to learn about the hunger winter in World War II, and then we are in 2003 back in the United States. But notice that every one of these major shifts in time is accompanied by a transitional device, a signal. By the time I was born in 1970, one afternoon in April, in the fall of 2003. And these are some of the most boring phrases in the English language, but they're doing enormous work. They're telling your reader where they are on the map. And see how this works? I just need to show you this scene at the end of it to to show you how these payoffs work. Because you get a scene like this, where they're walking together in the park, his mother and his aunt, and he's talking So, his aunt is named Bulu. And Bulu, who's the identical twin of his mother, reminisced about how the vicissitudes of their lives had reshaped her and her sister in different ways. While I couldn't help noting how fiercely they had converged. In calculus, the first derivative of a curve at any point refers not to the position of the point, but to its propensity to change its position. Not where an object is, but how it moves. This shared quality was the lasting link between my mother and her twin. Tulu and Bulu were no longer recognizably identical, but they shared the first derivative of identity. And so that line, the first derivative of identity, in isolation, is a pretty clever metaphor. But in context, after you have moved through this entire text, after you've seen the two sisters, you know, being born in Delhi and having these diverging lives and coming together at the end, and after you've learned about, you know, the entire development of this field of epigenetics, that line, that metaphor really pops. And if you haven't read this article, then you might just have to take my word for it. But I can show you another way this works, as well. Notice over here, freckles. Okay, so he's using this line and he's talking about even though two twins can have the same genome, uh chance events in their lives can cause different expressions of their genes. So, he says, "Chance events, injuries, infections, infatuations, uh da da da, they impinge on one twin and not the other. Genes are turned on and off in response to these events as epigenetic marks are gradually layered above genes, etching the genome with its own scars, calluses, and freckles." Freckles. Like, freckles on the genome. That's such that that that's an image that was planted at the beginning of the piece twice. He hits us twice in the opening with this image of freckles. Now, at the beginning, he's using freckles to say they both have the same freckled skin. And he's looking for the precise map of freckles on her face. It It's the scene where one aunt They're playing a trick on the kid. They're you know, it's the She's pretending to be the mother talking to the son and trying to see if he'll notice that they've swapped each other. And so, in order to figure out which one he's talking to, he's looking for these precise markers, the freckles. But now, this image, which has already been established at the beginning, is being used at the end to tell us the way that these epigenetic marks are. So, it's just wonderful the way that image was developed at the beginning and then used to pay off at the end. And that's something that you can only get by carefully structuring the layout of time. It's the kind of payoff at the end of a piece that's not possible without a setup, and you can't have a setup without orienting your reader in time along the way. And for the last move, whenever you are writing about something that you care about, like, of course you think it's important. But the question is, how do you get your readers to care about it? Well, to get concrete, readers of the New Yorker might be educated and perhaps familiar with the field of epigenetics, but we never assume that they're primarily interested in it. Otherwise, they'd be reading a scientific journal. So, we have to assume that your reader does not care about what you care about. That's where we have to begin the writing because consider the opposite. If you assume that readers share your values, then you're preaching to the converted. You see this is used everywhere in writing about the environment. Words like sustainability, diversity, and progress are deployed as though they're self-evidently good. And maybe they should be, but if your reader already agrees with you, then what's the point and what's the value of your writing? Your article does the work of moving somebody onto your side. Here's how Mukherjee does it. He knows that readers of The New Yorker don't automatically care about epigenetics. So, what do they care about? Well, they care about families. They care about immigrants. They care about two women born in Delhi in 1942. So, that's where he builds the door into this world of epigenetics through a family story. By the time we're in a lab looking at histones, we're already on his side. We care about what he cares about. And I have to point this out because I think he pulls this off in a way that's just so subtle, but so effective. At this point in the article, he introduces an experiment on ants. And this is important to our understanding of certain genes and how they get turned on and off by the environment. But this story, you could imagine, could have been a pretty dry, technical digression, just reporting on a science experiment, very far from the human story that we've been tracking. And so, watch what Mukherjee does here. He describes the colony of ants using the word cast. Now, that one word imports everything from the previous episode about his family, Indian society, where the story began, and the emotional stakes. All of it gets hyperlinked into this scene about the experiment on ants. And this is a fantastic move whenever we're trying to engender our values in the reader. We don't debate the reader into our point. We don't persuade them. We need to build them a bridge from where they are, what they currently care about, onto what you want to show them. The readers of the New Yorker cared about family, and they cared about the caste system. So, Mukherjee uses this language from that world to describe what could otherwise be a pretty inhuman scene. And we see this kind of empathy as well whenever Mukherjee is describing uh the research scientist Alice. You know, he doesn't just report on the cold facts of his experiments. He tells us that Alice is ruthlessly self-effacing in a way that his colleagues find endearing. He tells us that Alice had a fraternal twin who was more studious and in whose shadow he grew up. And this is a great passage because it seems like a digression at first, but it just contributes so much to our understanding of the scientist and the questions that he's asking. So, it says, "As a child, Alice grew up in the leeward shadow of his sister, a fraternal twin, in Cincinnati. She was the studious one, the straight-A student. He was the popular kid, the high school fraternity president, casual about his schoolwork. We were similar but different," Alice said. "At some point in college, though, Alice's studies became a calling rather than a chore. In 1978, having obtained his Ph.D., Alice began to tackle a problem that had long troubled geneticists and biologists. If all the cells in the body have the same genome, how does one become the nerve cell and say another a blood cell, and which looks and functions very differently. So, in one sense, this little story might look like a digression or just some kind of character development, but in another, it contributes a lot to our understanding of the research question that he devoted his life to understanding, which is why cells become different from one another. The principle is one that you've heard before, show, don't tell, but the execution, the way that Mukherjee pulls this off, is harder than it might sound. If you tell your readers that a researcher is passionate, that's a label, but if you're like Mukherjee, and you tell your readers that a researcher scored an A- minus in his first biochemistry class in college, but felt that he hadn't really mastered the material, so he applied to take the class again, well, that's not just a label, that's a character. And so, whenever you're writing about science or ideas, you know, these pretty abstract subjects, it's important to remember that these characters are everywhere. Science does not happen on its own. People do science. They run studies, they ask questions, they make decisions. So, whenever you interview somebody, don't just interview them as a source of information. Interview them as a human being who's pursuing their own motives. Ask them questions like, how did you end up spending your life studying this topic? Or ask them, what was your most important experience? Those questions will open doors that fact-gathering never will. And just keep in mind that the people in your story are not only the experts, they're also patients, homeowners, students, neighbors, anyone who lives inside the world that your question opens up. Because if your reader can see people, they'll follow you anywhere, even into epigenetics. But essays like this only work if you have a strong opening, because if your reader doesn't make it past the first paragraph, it doesn't matter how good the other ones are. So, watch this video next because it's going to show you a three-part system for introductions that'll keep your readers hooked. So, be sure to go check it out.
