TITLE: Why You Should Write an Essay (Even If No One Reads It)
DATE: 20260409
URL: https://youtu.be/4nIo92ALrd0
SOURCE: en-orig

Writing online will change your life, but probably not in the way that you think. Sure, there are the things that everyone talks about, like growing an audience or increasing your income, attracting opportunities, or building your personal brand. And yes, those are real benefits, but they're the consequences of writing online. They're what happens after your writing works. But what nobody talks about is what the writing does to you, whether or not anyone actually reads it. Because writing nonfiction, from micro essays to tweets, from newsletters to books, is not just a way to share what you think. It's how you figure out what you think in the first place. And that's why as an English professor, I'm always stressing that learning to write might be the single most practical skill that you can develop. So in this video, I'm going to break down a step-by-step process for how to write well, and no, we're not going to talk about grammar. Why writing makes you powerful and by that, I don't mean something empty and clickbaity. I'm talking about real power, which is the ability to wield influence and affect change in the world, and how to find your writer's voice in a way that can't be replaced by AI. All right, so if you want to write well, then you know what, I'm going to take out that word write well, and I'm going to say write valuably. Because in the world of nonfiction, readers are not interested in your grammar, they're not interested in your word choice. They are trading you their attention for value. So let's get rid of the question of how to write well and think about how to write valuably. And if you're writing valuably, it means you're answering questions or solving problems. And in order to do that, you need to use writing as your thinking. But a lot of writers don't get this. They've been trained by schoolmarms to do their thinking first and then write it up. And that works well in school, but it does not work on planet nonfiction because in order to answer questions and solve real problems, then you need to be generating new knowledge. But a lot of these school-bred writers will approach their writing in reverse. So they basically start with their thesis. Thesis is what we call it in school, but you start with your conclusion, you start with your idea, and then you go looking for evidence, anecdotes, metaphors, whatever that the stuffing of that idea in order to support it. And if you approach your writing this way, then your evidence becomes kind of like a decoration. It's like you've already got your idea, and now you're trying to think about how to communicate this idea, and so you go looking for evidence like a quote or or a story or whatever kind of stuff you're using in order to support it. But if you're doing that, then you are not writing valuably. You're not generating new knowledge, you're not solving real problems, and you're not answering questions that anyone actually has. So this problem usually comes up whenever writers think about their texts as being about a topic. So you pick a topic like a noun, and you start writing about it. And if you write that way, then everything becomes evidence for your idea. You don't have any way to direct your writing and your thinking. So instead of a topic, what I want you to do is start your text with a question. A question holds the conclusion in suspension. Something I actually run with my academic and professional writing class is that I have I literally make them say this out loud in class. I have them write down the question that their essay is trying to answer, and then literally in class, I have them say out loud, "Hmm, I don't know. What evidence would I need in order to answer this question?" And if you think you understand this point that I'm making, you probably don't. Because if you're anything like my students, that you know, I've lectured on this idea again and again and again, and I'll go through the whole semester railing about this point that you do not start an essay with a topic or an idea, you start it with a question. And they say, "Ah, yes, okay, I understand very well." And then just to test them, I'll say, you know, "Okay, we're going to write we're going to practice writing an essay on the board. And let's let's write an essay." And I'll come up with a topic like, "Oh, what's better, online education or offline education?" And then I'll have them stand up and go to opposite sides of the room. So I'll say, "If you think online education is better, go to this side of the room. If you think offline education is better, go to that side of the room." And they all comply, and they're all standing there. And then I'll say, "Busted. How can you know? How can you have an How can you have an opinion? How can you have an answer to that question if you haven't written about it in the first place? Sit down, you all fail." &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; I don't fail them, but I could. I feel like I should, you know, I feel like this If this was Squid Game, this would be one of those like elimination rounds. But the purpose of this activity is to really hit home the idea that the question is your filter. The question is your filter. So like there's all this evidence in the world, there are all these quotes and things that you could draw on in your own lived experience that you could just throw into your essay at will. But when you begin your essay with a question, it becomes a way of evaluating that evidence. And so you look at the question, which is like which is better, online education or offline education, and rather than standing up and going to opposite sides of the room, making your choice, you look at the question and you repeat after me. And you say, "Hmm, I don't know. What evidence would I need in order to answer that question?" Right? If you begin your essay there, now you have a filter. The question is your filter for the evidence. Now you can look out into the world of all this data, all these experiences, all these quotes you've read, everything, and you know what to draw on. So without a question, then you're basically drowning in information with no principle about, you know, how to choose what's important. Beginning your text with a question allows you to hold your conclusion or your own ideas in suspension while you go about searching for relevant evidence. And this principle of beginning with a question can be a real problem for fast thinkers and divergent thinkers. Because for them, answers are jumping into their mind intuitively, and they go grasping for those branches as they occur to them. So sometimes in these classes or with my clients, they have a difficult time with me. It feels like I'm trying to rein them in or suppress their thought. But really what we're trying to do here is adopt a principle. It's called the inquiry method, in case you're interested in learning more about it. But it's essentially a principle for arriving at the truth. It's like in the scientific method. Like we know that humans are corrupted by our own biases, and so over on planet science, we developed this method that allows us to approximate the truth, to come closer to the truth, so that we know that we're not being clouded by our own judgment. And the scientific method is great in the material world, but it's not so useful in the world of values. Like you can't really design a science experiment to say what the meaning of art is or which politician we should vote for. Right? Those are value judgments. And so you need a method like the scientific method to help you arrive at a principled conclusion. And that's what the inquiry method does. And so with this method, we are beginning with a question. That's step one. You You start with a question, and the question is your filter for evidence, which is step two. Now evidence, if if you know a little Latin, then you know that the root of evidence comes from the same word for vision. So evidence is something that both like anybody can see just by looking. It's It's like raw data. It's something that we can all agree on that doesn't have values baked into it. It's not good nor bad. It's just true. And so that's a useful second step, but it's not enough to get us to developing a valuable idea. Right? We're trying to write valuably, we're trying to come up with new ideas, and facts alone can't help us do that. What we need to do is explain those facts with our own reasoning. So that's step three. Evidence exists out there in the world, reasons are values that exist within your own thinking. And at this point, it almost becomes mathematical because it's like, you know, we have a question that we're trying to answer. Okay, let me see what I can do. So here's the evidence, and then I add my reasoning to it, and then it's just evidence plus reasoning equals claim. Now claim is your own original idea. And if somebody doesn't agree with your claim, what part are they going to disagree with? I was like, "Okay, you don't like my idea. Which part don't you agree with? Do you agree about the evidence? Evidence is evidence. It's right there. Look at it. Did I describe it correctly? Okay, well, here's my reasoning. Do you disagree with that?" And it's like, "Ah, no, that's pretty good." And this is where writing becomes powerful because now it's like your idea is mathematically sound. It's grounded in evidence, your reasoning is right there to be interpreted, and the new idea is just the output of those variables. All right. Now I know there was a lot there. So as an overview, what is this method? How do you write valuably? Start with a question. All right. Now read widely about that question, trying to answer it to yourself. And as you find relevant evidence for this, start to explain that evidence to yourself in your writing. Now once you've synthesized all of this evidence into a framework that makes sense to you, now you can start it. Now you can start refining the style at the sentence level, at the paragraph level, at the word choice level, going through the whole text. This is what it means to use your writing not just as a vehicle to communicate your ideas, pre-formed ideas, right? It's to use it to discover what you believe. This method is probably the most practical approach to this whole meme that we see online where you know, writing is thinking. Well, this is what I mean by writing is thinking. All right? If you start your text off with a question and you ground your inquiry in the evidence and just follow that evidence wherever it leads, this is what writing is thinking means. But I promised you power, all right? So, how does this make you powerful? Well, I think that if you follow this kind of a writing process, then the payoff is not stylistic. You know, I haven't been sitting here talking about grammar and word choice. What we've been talking about is the method that you bring to your non-fiction writing. And to be honest, everybody wants to develop their own style, especially in the age of AI when all of our voices are starting to blend together in this kind of enthusiastic din, you know, this voice that we get from AI. So, everybody wants to develop their own writing style. And let me tell you, your style does emerge from this process. Like, style is not reducible to the sum of its parts. You know, you you can't exactly describe the writing style of your favorite writer. Take Hemingway, Cormac McCarthy, David Foster Wallace, any of these very stylistic writers. You can't explain that style with recourse to the mechanics alone. All right? I think the way to understand writing style is to think about the writer's interaction with their own inquiry, which sounds, you know, kind of academic or whatever, but really, I mean, if you're writing valuably, then as I said before, you are thinking thoughts that have not been thought before. And so, you're struggling with something. You you have some new idea that has not been articulated yet. And so, you're kind of grasping at it. You're saying, "Oh, it's a little bit like this. It's a little bit like that." And then you've got this mess on the page and now you start refining it. And as a byproduct of of of that struggle with the truth, a kind of style that we can describe retroactively by, you know, recourse to grammar and word choice, that emerges. But it wasn't pre-planned by the writer by thinking, "Ooh, I'm going to use this fancy uh sentence structure or whatever it might be." Like, nobody's actually thinking about that. All the stylistic writers, you pick your favorite writer, I think if you like them, it was because they were dealing with something that spoke to you. All right? So, and that's the reason that the style works is because they found something true and they articulated it in a way that resonated with you. So, the point here about writing well is not aesthetic. I'm not talking about style. But I can promise that if you do take this approach to your writing, style will emerge as a happy byproduct. But a better product for your writing is power because if you're writing this way, then you are you're kind of sending your text out into the world. I almost think about the text as like a third party. There's you, there's your reader, and there's this text that when you're done with it, goes out into the world and if it's written well, which has nothing to do with style or mechanics or anything like that, but if you're writing well, which we have defined in this video as writing valuably, then you are kind of sending your text out into the world to do something. Now, that might be to persuade customers to buy your product, it might be to overturn a commonly held assumption, it might just be to gain status with people whom you respect and want to be respected by. Whatever it is, your text is doing work in the world. And the common thread here is that you're using your writing to affect change. And so, what's your definition of power? What's your definition of authority? My definition is the ability to affect change and to increase the likelihood that other people will comply with your request. Well, that's exactly what we've described with valuable writing. You are sending your text out into the world and if it works, if you've written valuably, then it does what you intended it to do. So, there's no meaningful difference between being authoritative and being articulate. If you can articulate your ideas, articulate your argument, articulate your vision for the way that things should be and you your text is effective, then you are by that definition authoritative. Writing is a way to develop the skills that give you real-world power. And so, even if nobody reads today's essay, you have practiced the skills that will help you tomorrow when you walk into a boardroom or a sales pitch or any of the other places in your life where you might want to wield that power. And I spoke a moment ago about finding your voice or your own writing style. And that is quite important in this stage of AI because honestly, everybody's voice is just blending together in this homogeneous kind of hygienic slop. And for that reason, I've been thinking a lot about writing style lately and you know, what it means. Everybody talks about writing style, but what actually is it? And what do I do to develop my own? And I'm going to be releasing a longer video on that later on, so you can stay tuned for that. But in the meantime, I what I've been kind of coming to as I'm kind of sketching out these ideas is writing style is not exactly something that we can describe at the level of word choice and grammar. A better way to think about it is to think of it as an integrity, right? An integration between what you think and what you say or write about. When those two things are in line, when you have a clear vision of what you think is true by dint of your own inquiry, you've arrived at truths that that you truly see in the world and as you articulate those truths, the words that you grasp in order to share them will form your own writing style. So, writing style is not something you can plan for. It's something that emerges organically from this process. But at this point, I've got to come clean because the title and the thumbnail of this video was actually designed to call out a certain meme that floats around here on writing YouTube. I'm never beating the clickbait charges. This idea that writers should just write about whatever they're interested in and not not even think about readers and write even if nobody reads it or write as though nobody's going to read it. Honestly, I think this is a really bad export from the world of fiction. Cuz over on planet fiction, like, yeah, maybe you should just write about whatever you're interested in. Readers be damned. But this meme has infected the world of non-fiction writing and the result is basically a whole ecosystem of substacks that everybody writes and nobody reads. If you've ever wondered why nobody's reading your substack or why a substack is so bad, this is it. It's because all these people think that they can just write about whatever it is they're interested in and people will just line up and willingly trade their attention or even their money in order to read it. This is not the way that readers work. And I think the reason that this piece of writing advice to ignore readers is so popular and why my message, which is to obsess over readers, is not quite so popular, is because it sounds like my path is the path to audience capture. It sounds like a cheap kind of degraded form of writing where you're just a slave to reader interests and you're not actually using the full potential of writing to express yourself and and and use it to do your own thinking. This is why I'm always stressing that there are two phases of writing. And this video has been focusing squarely on the first function of writing, which is to use the writing to do your own thinking. So, in phase one, we're just thinking about the writer and your own thinking. And in phase two, we start to position your ideas as the solution to problems that readers care about. But it's true that many writers who blend these two functions together become paralyzed. And that's why that earlier advice of ignore readers is helpful to a certain extent. But not only does thinking about readers too soon in the process lead to writer's block, but it can also corrupt your own thinking. Right? If you let the reader's concerns creep in while you're still using your writing to do your thinking, while you're trying to solve problems, answer questions, examine evidence, develop reasoning, we're going to turn into these little social monkeys that we are and our opinions are going to start to be influenced by the people who have now crept into the writer's room. If you skip phase two where we think about readers, then basically you're writing for substack. Right? You're writing for yourself. Nobody's going to read this crap. But if you skip phase one, then you are in the world of audience capture. You're not generating anything new, you're not generating anything valuable, you're just giving the readers what they want. And that's one kind of writing, but you know, it's not the kind of writing that I'm interested in. Because this process with both of these together are really important. And whenever you subordinate your own thinking to the opinions of others, like go back to university. Maybe you wrote a paper in such a way that you were just trying to impress the professor, right? You were just throwing back their opinions at them. It's very similar to the thing that many people do when they're writing for a specific audience, right? They're just giving the audience the opinions that they want. And by the way, all of the writing teachers, and you know who they are, who are telling you to ignore readers and just write for yourself, that's exactly what they're doing. They haven't thought deeply about this problem. They're just telling people what they want to hear. Those people are stuck in phase two. They're only thinking about their audience, and they're not actually thinking about a problem. And the reason that this audience-focused writing alone is so corrupting is that it actually like How do I put this? The thinking that you do through writing, it actually becomes part of you. It becomes part of your cognitive structure, right? So you sit down with a problem, and then you start writing about it, and you start sharing your ideas online, and those arguments become a part of your character, right? They become a part of the cognitive structure, like the map or the framework that you use to understand and interpret the world. And your perceptions, in turn, start to affect your behavior, and your behaviors amount to your character, and your character is your destiny. This stuff is important, folks. So when you start letting audience concerns, whether your audience is a professor or readers or whoever is reading your nonfiction, when you start to let their opinions influence your own idea generation, you give up something truly vital about yourself. All right, so language and thought, at the end of the day, are inseparable. You use language to do your thinking, and as your thinking is, so your language becomes. And this is what gives your writing its value. It's not the content that you produce. You might write one essay today, which says X, and then 3 years from now discover that you actually don't believe that anymore. That's fine. The value of your writing was not in generating X or not X. The value is the product at the end, which is an articulate mind. So to learn how to execute this two-phase writing process step by step, you need to watch this video next because it's going to show you my expert writing process from start to finish. So be sure to go check it out.
