TITLE: The EXACT System to Transform Messy Drafts into Clear Writing
DATE: 20260913
URL: https://youtu.be/6HPNb0tiDNg
SOURCE: en-orig

If you're a writer who cares about your readers, but you don't have a clear, proven system that'll help you translate complex ideas into cohesive linear pros, then it's very likely that you'll end up like so many writers who focus on all the wrong things that'll never get readers to actually read your text. So, in this video, I'm going to give you the exact system I use to help my clients organize their ideas from a messy draft into a crisp manuscript, all without losing the original meaning and without losing your voice to AI. I've broken it down into six parts. So, as this video goes on, it's going to get more and more valuable. And for those of you who already have 50 unpublished drafts saved somewhere on your hardware, this could be all you need to get unstuck and finally publish work that you're proud of. So to start, who is this system going to work for? Well, it's not going to work for fiction writers or memoir or poetry or any writing that doesn't make a point? But if you do use your writing to make points, which means answering questions or solving problems either for yourself or for your readers or just more generally if you're using writing as an extension of your own thinking, then it can. So this week, for example, I used this strategy on two very different clients. One was an academic researcher who's applying for a grant worth over €200,000. And the other was a clinical psychologist who was drawing on her own kind of unorthodox background experience to try to make a new point to pretty clinical researchers in her field. So there we have two very different types of clients who are writing in completely different genres. But the thing that unites them and the reason the strategy works is because both of their manuscripts were pointed. They were trying to make a point and make an argument about that point to basically convince their readers of that point. And so the reason the system works for both of these different types of clients and the reason they came to me for help is that when your writing has stakes, you can never edit it yourself. There is a common piece of uh writing advice, particularly common in the world of fiction, which says whenever you are writing a draft, you should take a day off or two days off and then read it over because what you want to do is read it as a stranger would. But that's actually impossible. And I mean that scientifically. So there was a study at Carnegie Melon University which demonstrates the very fact that it is impossible to proofread your own writing. And it goes like this. And so in this experiment, they prepared a document about a pretty technical non-fiction subject. So think a scientific report or um a kind of breakdown of some technology and they filled the document with these errors, structural errors. So we're not talking about like a misplaced comma or a spelling mistake. We're talking about logical gaps, inconsistencies between ideas, the these kind of more macro structural issues. And then they gave that document to two different groups of people. But this one group, they actually briefed on the subject. They gave them essentially background knowledge and told them some of the information that would also be relayed to them in the document. Whereas with this other group, they just gave them the document cold. Who do you think caught more of the errors? Well, the fact is it was the people who read it cold that caught the errors. The readers who had been briefed on the subject essentially used their background knowledge to skate over the logical gaps and basically fill in those gaps with what they already know. Because they brought this background knowledge to their reading experience, they weren't able to notice the logical gaps and flaws in the text in a way that a cold reader could. And the point of this experiment is to show that you are always the briefed reader of your own draft. You're the one who wrote it. And of course, you had the idea before you wrote the text. Like you were thinking of the idea, whatever it is that you're writing about, and then you're the one who chose the words to represent that thought. So whenever you read your own words, you are never in the position of a reader who is interpreting just based on what you've given them. Readers have a pretty hard job. They need to look at your words and then kind of build this edifice. And if you write well then the edifice that they've built in their mind matches the one that you had in your mind. But the problem is when you're reading your own writing, you're not doing the same interpretation. You're not converting words into symbols into this edifice. You're just remembering the edifice that you already have in your mind. And so if you're just relying on your intuition or just waiting for some time to pass between when you wrote something and and when you edit it, that's why you're running into problems with your editing. And so instead of relying on your intuition, what you need is a step-by-step system. And this is exactly the system that I run with my clients. And so we start here. And so this is kind of like an abstract representation of a text. You know, it's Lauram Ipsum. So we have some paragraphs and a block quote here and the title, but it kind of represents any non-fiction genre. And so what's the first step you want to do? The first thing that I would have you do is essentially underline whatever you consider to be the introduction and the conclusion and just ignore everything in the middle for a second. Now, the reason I have the writer or the client identify whatever they consider to be the introduction is that sometimes the introduction can span over, you know, a few paragraphs or a few pages. So, we're not just talking about like the first sentence. It's just whatever you consider to be the opening preamble to that section. I want you to underline that. Okay. Now, we have two sections. And so, now that we've identified each of those sections, the next thing to do is underline the sentence that you think best captures the point of this section. And so the reason that we do it at the introduction and the end is that whenever you're writing, you've probably done your best to articulate the point in your introduction. But whenever you are doing expert writing, whenever you're answering questions or solving problems, whenever you're basically using writing as an extension of your thinking, you move through the text in time. And so you start off with kind of a vague idea of what your what your point is going to be. But as you work through these ideas, as you bring in the evidence and you analyze it and you know, you kind of string these things together by the end when you hit your conclusion, usually the point here, although it's the same point, is going to be a lot more refined. And so that's why I like to just isolate the introduction and the conclusion at the beginning and find the most important sentence in each of those and just compare them. First of all, check are they making the same point, right? Because we do you do want your essay to kind of have this um feeling of closure, right? You don't want it to be making some wildly different point than you did at the beginning. Now, that doesn't mean repeat the point from the introduction. I'm going to tell you a little bit about the difference between an introduction and the conclusion in just a moment, but for now, just analyze the two sentences that you consider to be most important. And I have an example here for us. And by the way, these are just model sentences. So, I've chosen the topic to be personal essays because I work with a lot of personal essayists. So, we're going to talk about Joan Ddian and James Baldwin. But it says during this unprecedented period independent essaists shared the process of creating a new public intellectual culture through their accounts of personal experience. So it's all about bringing personal experience into the essay genre. That would be the point from the introduction. And now contrast it with the point that we find in the conclusion because this is what a lot of the points in the conclusions look like by contrast. It says, "While many were eager to slash the essay's ties to the argumentative tradition, Joan Ddian and James Baldwin wrote pieces which kept the machinery of argument visible and which made that machinery a central part of the personal essay's new authority." So, of course, that's just an example, but this is generally what I find that the point we discover in the conclusion, if it is the same point, that's the first thing you want to check. But if they're both making the same point, then generally the one in the conclusion will be more refined. And so just examine these two sentences and say which one do you think is more pointed? Which one is sharper? Which one is more refined? And of course, you can also synthesize them. So if you find them quite different, if this one is missing pieces that that one is missing, you can bring them together because what we're doing is essentially trying to make the central point. We're trying to kind of draw out of these the strongest elements and bring them into one crisp point sentence because the next thing that we have to make, the next decision that we have to make is where to locate it. And so we're just carrying this over here. So here's the introduction, the conclusion. We've now synthesized these into this point sentence. And we have the choice of placing that point sentence in the introduction or here at the bottom. And the diff generally of course you're going to put your point uh at the end of the beginning if that makes sense. You know here um if this is the introduction paragraph then we would generally find the the thesis or the point to be toward the end of the beginning. But sometimes you can put it at the bottom here and that's what I would call point last. So here's the difference between them. With a point first essay you're quite familiar with this. You know you just have your introduction paragraph put the thesis down here and that's conventional. that's what your reader is expecting. But if for whatever reason, if you decide that you want to hold off on delivering the thesis, you can do that. Uh this point last structure, you see it sometimes in more creative non-fiction, especially not necessarily with the entire with with the point of the entire essay, right? The thesis will almost always be in the introduction. But if you scale this down as a fractal pattern into um you know just a section then you'll often see authors kind of hold off on delivering the point until the end. And the way that you can do that with point last structure if you're go like if you're going to put the thesis or the the main point down here in the conclusion then you at least need to give the reader a preview of where you're going. It could be a promise but at least a thematic kind of introduction of the key concepts so that by the time they arrive at the conclusion they have a sense of closure and of inevitability and of cohesion. So the way that I'm kind of representing this is that um some I've kind of looked at this point sentence and identified what are the key concepts in it. And so for the sake of this example, we've said that argument uh the personal essay and the new authority, those are important concepts in this passage. And so therefore, whatever we put in the introduction, we want to save for the end of the point sentence these three concepts. These are called key terms. And ideally you would I mean depending on how the essay goes but ideally you would have one po one one section here about argument one section about the personal essay one section about new authority because that's it's almost like a chord if you think about it like music like an arpeggio or something and like once you once you assemble these three disparate notes into well strum them together you get a chord. So by kind of developing them independently like that or by introducing them and then developing them independently you can then weave them all together strike that chord and that becomes quite uh pointant and as I said inevitable. So that's point last. As you can see it's a little bit advanced. Do it if you wish. Um but generally what your reader is expecting is to find the point of your essay right here at the end of the beginning. And so now that we've set the frame of your essay with the with the beginning and the end and we've put the point where the reader is expecting to find it. Now what we want to do is apply a very similar strategy to the section the the units within the essay. And this structure is quite important you know because if you when when structure works it's almost invisible. And you know this I mean pick your favorite writer think of your favorite non-fiction book. It is structured. It it does have a structure, but I bet you as the reader spent no time noticing it. Okay. So, when structure works, it's invisible, right? It it it it's what allows the reader to kind of step into the logical world that the book is trying to open up or the essay or whatever it is. So, that's the goal. Now, what are some signs of bad structure? Well, no structure is a pretty bad sign. And when when that happens like when you don't have any logical principle when you know if you and I were to meet if I were to say to you why did you organize it this way and you can't tell me then you have a flabby kind of amorphous document and it's a little bit like pudding like you know there might be raisins somewhere in here but the reader is not knowing where to find it and that can be a pretty frustrating reading experience. So you do want to organize things logically, not in some struct I mean I think structure can really emerge from the text and that's usually the way that you want to do it. What you don't want to do is organize things according to the way that they occurred to you. I've spoken elsewhere about the difference between writing patterns and reading patterns. And when you organize your paragraphs just and the sections just in the order that they occurred to you, you are working within the domain of writing patterns. And readers don't really know. They're not interested in following your own intellectual journey. They're not interested in the order with which they occur to you. Readers have questions like they see your point that prompts them to ask a question. they're expecting the answer to their question to occur at the at the moment when it occurs to them. So whenever you're organizing these, you need to think, you know, not in any rigid organizing pattern such as uh chronology or even these kind of clunky like sometimes writers will still not have any logical organizing principle, but they'll say first, second, third, right? They'll add to the start of their major points first, second, third. That's not an organizing principle. That just means that you have three of something. So here here's how we do this more practically. So I would ask you to then ignore the introduction and conclusion and just draw a line between the sections. So in this example in these three pages, let's say that we have two sections. And just as before, I'm going to ask you to underline the one sentence that sometimes it can be two or three sentences. Sometimes you've kind of distributed the point across um two or at most three sentences. But underline the point that you think articulates so perfectly the the point of this section. And if you can't find it, you have problem. You might need to rewrite it. But here, the way that I've represented it is, you know, we have the the point here occurring at the beginning. And then in section two, the point is just kind of occurring in the middle. And so just as before, we want to put those points where the reader is expecting to find them. So that is in the index position at the top of each section. Now, in a moment, I'm going to show you how to develop the um the remaining text, you know, because we've just like extracted the points from your draft and we've put them up here. So, what do we do with the rest of the stuff that you wrote? We're going to look at that in just a second. But one thing to notice is that between the in between these sections, so between the introduction and this and the section one here, we have a transition. And then again between section one and two, just a transition. That can be its own paragraph. It can be just the last sentence in the final paragraph. Format it however you wish, but it is nice to p kind of round up and push off of that point that you just finished making in the section and lead in. And it can often be a question. Actually, I think this is like um writers can sometimes overuse rhetorical questions, but it can be a kind of pallet cleanser because the question is such a sharp break in tone. Um, in the English language, there are four moods. So, generally we're writing in the declarative mood where we're we're making statements. Um, but there's also the interrogative mood where you ask a question. And that doesn't often happen in writing because they can't actually respond. And so if you use it sparingly and only to transition between points such as okay now that we've proven this point you know ask the next question the next logical question that arises especially if it mirrors the reader's own kind of thinking patterns. You know if if this is the question that the reader is now asking and they see the text ask it they feel understood and it's a great way to push off. However you want to do that, just make sure that you're transitioning. And now let's think about how to organize the material in the discussion. So whenever you're making a point, it's important to understand the kind of anatomy of a point. And I've represented it here. So you have a point and that point is you know somebody might ask you why. So um you know here's here's a sentence and it says Orwell would have opposed AI assisted writing. Let's say that's your point. Well, the next question that the reader is going to have is why would Orwell have opposed um AI assisted writing? And so the next thing that you need for a point to be valid is a reason. You need to be able to say point because and then give some rationale. But of course, you have to imagine if you're making a point, it also means that somebody else is wrong. So whatever your point is, you have to imagine that somebody out there is going to disagree with you. Otherwise, what's the point of your point? There's no point. So for every point there needs to be a reason. And for the person who disagrees with your point, they're going to attack your reason. That's why I've represented it as a triangle here because if they don't like this, then this is what they're going to attack. And that's why your reason always needs to be based on evidence. And now evidence varies by genre. with the earlier I mentioned a clinical psychologist who I'm working with and she is drawing her kind of body of evidence is her own personal experience that's why it's a little bit unorthodox for the the genre but with the academic I was working with it's the evidence is from his clinical labs and from data that he's pulled from uh certain research so it all depends on your reader and your genre of what counts as evidence you need to think about what kind of evidence is the reader going to accept but For every point, there needs to be a reason and evidence. That doesn't necessarily need to be three sentences, but you at least need at at a kind of higher order, you need those three elements to have an idea. And so assuming that you have all three pieces kind of, you know, spread out throughout this draft, we need to start checking to make sure that the evidence provides a real foundation for the reason and that the reason does support the point. And so here's just a quick kind of example of what happens when you start mapping out your ideas in this kind of a structure. So if we read this point again, it says Orwell would have opposed AI assisted writing because as he said, good pros is like a window pane. Now I don't know if that raised an eyebrow for you, but this is the kind of thing that we generally see whenever we start slotting your ideas into this kind of a structure. We see points that kind of are are plausibly supported by the evidence, but we we don't really see the there's a logical gap between them. And that's exactly the thing that becomes evident to your reader. It's exactly the thing that these people in the Carnegie Melon experiment noticed these guys when whenever you're you're a reader, you're outside of the writer's head. You're just kind of trying to assemble these ideas using the clues on the page. Logical gaps like that become very apparent. Now, if I ask the writer about, you know, the structure of these ideas, it's going to be obvious. It's like, well, of course he would. You know, he said good pros is like window panes. So you say what is the connection between good pros is like a window pane and AI writing. What how do how do you do that? And so by mapping out your ideas this way that helps you kind of see and check the logical strength and integrity of your points. And so after teasing this out we might find a passage more like this. Um, Orwell would have opposed AI assisted writing because he judged pros by whether a reader could see straight through it to the thing described. And borrowed phrasing leaves a film on the glass. That is the standard he set when he said good pros should be like a window pane. Okay. Now again, this is just an example, but it's the kind of thing that would satisfy this structure because we built a bridge from the point to the evidence. We have an explanation. Now, if you disagree with that explanation, if you disagree with the point, then now you actually have something to attack. But the point of this is to show that previously we didn't have that bridge. And so there was no connection between the point and the evidence. So now that we have kind of mapped out the logical structure of each of these points, we can start filling in that discussion section. And of course, there are all different kinds of ways that you can do this, but a useful pattern of development here is called the uneven U. Now, this comes from Eric Hyatt. He's an academic and he wrote about this in a book for the humanities, but I think this is useful across all non-fiction writing. And so, what does this show? Well, notice I I've mapped on to this uneven U, the structure that we've been talking about here with the index and the discussion. So what this measures is the uh level of specificity over time. And I think generally whenever you are writing a paragraph or a section or any piece of pointed pros, it's going to have a pattern of progress like this where we begin at level four. So we have five levels here. Down here is something specific and concrete. That's your exam. That's your evidence. That could be a quote or a statistic or whatever evidence that you're using. And then up here we have the kind of mo most general kind of abstract level of discourse that you could think of. And so if those are the poles, then ideally you want to begin at a level four, not level five. If you begin at level five, it it it's kind of so vacuous that it like it's not even a point. It's just true. So, we need to come one level down to make sure that we're beginning with something a little bit specific. What's a good test of level four? I generally say it's something that someone else could disagree with. All right? So, it's level four means it's falsifiable. Somebody else could say, "What? How could you say that?" Okay? If if you look at that kind of point sentence in the index position and nobody could disagree with it, you don't really have a sharp enough point. But if you do, you're ready to progress. And I'm going to give you an example of it down here. But just to kind of map it out abstractly, what you want to do essentially throughout this pattern of development is to stay on that point, but kind of progress down to level three where you are explaining what you mean, elaborating on it, and drawing yourself closer to the evidence. Now, level two, that's where you start preparing the reader for the evidence. So, for example, if you have a quote, uh maybe there's an important concept or key term in that quote. Well, try to use an analog or like a close synonym of that key term at level two to kind of prepare the reader for it. Why do we do it this way? I think it's because it's really hard to process very specific information. Um there there's one, you know, piece of advice I see floating around sometimes is to like open with a surprising statistic or or a surprising quote. I'm saying the opposite here. Like I think that's a really terrible way to open a point because it's so specific that the reader has no context for interpretation. So they don't really like you can give them the idea, but they don't really know what to do with it. So instead the uneven you guides you to uh lay the kind of conceptual foundation so that the reader is prepared and ready to interpret the very specific information at level one. But the important thing here moving forward is that we don't drop them here. You know in the book they say I say um it's a book on academic writing but they have a great section on what they call the hitandrun quotation. And I think that happens a lot. Writers will kind of, you know, maybe uh they they'll do the first half of this properly, so they'll move move from general to specific, but then they'll just drop the reader that kind of inverted triangle. They'll just drop like drop them with this highly specific information and say, "Do what you want with it." Well, no. We don't want to do that. We've now prepared the reader to accept this information. And so now we give it to them and now we want to start helping them weave it back in to the conceptual thread the foundation that we've laid out here effectively in a you know a good section we are more or less saying something like this here. Here's my point and stick around because I'm going to I'm going to prove it to you. All right. So this thing works like this and that reminds me of a pretty good piece of evidence and here's the evidence. And so, as I was saying, that evidence shows us this. And so, as I told you, this point is true. And so, we we return to the point. And not exactly to the point, but to the same level of abstraction. We're not just this doesn't mean just repeat what you said at the beginning, but it does mean return to that conceptual level of the idea before finally pushing off to a more general level of resolution than where you began. Why is that? Well, imagine it playing out over this, and I'm going to give you an example in just a moment, but imagine this pattern of development playing out in this section here. So, we've made the kind of thesis and now we're introducing one of the finer points of that thesis. Well, we bring the reader down. We give the evidence. Now, we're coming back up. Well, we don't just want to say, see, told you so, right? At at the end of this section. We don't want to say so, you know, as I said, what we want to do is push off of this point. So, this is rounded off at level four. And now we want to link it back up to level five to a more general level because this section one is a subpoint of the entire thesis. So we want to now that we you know we say we make a promise. I'm going to show you this point. We do all the work. We prove the point. Now we come back up. We say see I told you the point. And here's how that helps us answer this larger question that we're trying to answer. Something like that. Of course there are all different kinds of ways that you can do this. It's so abstract that it's hard to get specific. But down here I I have written a kind of model example and I've labeled what I think are the different levels of resolution. So see if this makes sense. This says AI assisted writing would have been distrusted and probably opposed by plain style writers like George Orwell who judged pros by whether a reader could see straight through to the thing he described. The greatest threat to that that clarity he thought was language the writer had not chosen. His standard is made in the famous essay why I write. Good pros should be like quote a window pane. But the sharper statement comes in another essay from the same year on politics and language where he describes bad modern writing as strips of words already set in by someone else gummed together like the panels of a pre-fabricated hen house. The complaint in these passages is that ready-made language lets a writer finish a sentence before having arrived at what it means. But where Orwell saw the problem of language without thought exemplified in the cliche, it has become a general in the era of AI which offers fluent phrasing before the writer has settled on a thought. The precedence of clear pros over clear thought shows us that Orwell's window was never a test of the formal features of the text. It was a test of which comes first, the window or the vision. Now, it's always risky as like the writing teacher to give you examples of my own writing because you guys are just going to roast me in the comments. Look, I was trained in literary criticism. So, it's the kind of thing that might work better in my field than in yours. And just try to think creatively about how you would use this because I think this pattern of development, whatever your genre, works because it kind of it gives the reader a nice experience of specificity. Like, you know, in here there are actually two level one statements. There were two quotes that I brought in. So, it was kind of like level two, level one, level two, level one, and then up to level three. And that's important because we're now like we're staying on the evidence. We're not dropping it, right? The level three sentence says the complaint in these passages is that ready-made language lets a writer finish a sentence before having arrived at what it means. So, we're interpreting the quote. We're weaving it back in to the point that we've been trying to make. We're not dropping it. That's the point of the hit-and- run quotation. Whenever you introduce some highly specific information, don't just drop it and move on. Weave it in. Show the reader how it links to the point that you're trying to make. And then don't just finish at that point, but push off to a more general level of resolution. And now for the last check that you'd want to run on your writing. It is the certainty. You want to make sure that your points are not being made too stridently, but at the same time, you don't want to be so mely mouthed that there's nothing at stake and there's not really any argumentative energy in your writing. And so I have here the same point and I've written it three different ways and we're going to measure it using this scale down here with hedged on one side, uh, stridident on the other, and right in the middle well calalibrated. So the first one says, "Every plain style writer would have condemned AI assisted writing outright. Orwell judged pros by one thing only, whether the reader sees straight through to the thing described." And no sentence produced this way ever passes that test. And so sometimes writers who write this way can actually be kind of fun. Like they they can be they there's a lot of moxy in this kind of writing and they can be very pointed, but you really have to earn it. And so in this case it it kind of verges on the on the end of um arrogance I think because you see all these qualifiers right it says every plain style writer would have condemned right AI assisted writing outright whenever you see these kinds of qualifiers like too many of them stacked up those are usually um I actually made this point in a lecture earlier this week is that whenever we're in a critical thinking class and students were saying well obviously this and of course that and common sense. And whenever you see these things, it's actually usually a sign, al although they're meant to signal strength and confidence, what they're usually filling up is a lack of argumentation. And so I think that's what we see here. Orwell judge pros by one thing only, right? So these kinds of things make the piece a little too strided. So contrast that with the same point written differently. It says for some time now many writers in the plain style tradition might arguably have been somewhat wary of AI assisted writing and some of them may have perhaps opposed it since figures like Orwell seem to have generally judged pros at least partly by whether a reader could more or less see through to the thing he described. So obviously we are now at the other end of the spectrum. There are so many hedges in this piece that it's almost meaningless. Like it's it's so hedges are words, you know, like for some time now, many, not all. Uh they might arguably have written partly, right? These kinds of things soften the level of confidence. And of course, you need to do that. You do need to modulate the strength of your claim. But if you go too far in the other direction then you appear to uncon like it's it's not scientists generally write this way because they want to be cautious and precise but at that end of the spectrum the reader loses all confidence in you and so what you want is a balance between them and there's an important strategy so see if you can notice what balances this last example so it says writers in the plain style would have distrusted AI assisted writing and Orwell almost certainly would have opposed it. He judged pros by whether a reader could see straight through to the thing he described. And drafting that begins with unchosen phrasing puts something in the way. And so that is what I would consider a calibrated sentence. And so how do you do this on your own pros? Well, look at the verb and look at the subject. So the common advice for hedging your writing would be to look at the verb. So, for example, the the overly hedged passage, we see like when you look at all the verbs, you see might arguably have been somewhat wary, right? The the verb is be wary. They would have been weary, but might arguably have been weary. So, that's the common advice and it is good advice. You need to choose like rather than using all these modal verbs like might arguably have been somewhat, right? All those just choose the right verb. And again with AI and and or you can use a thesaurus there there's no excuse. There are so many verbs out there to perfectly capture your meaning. So if you notice the kind of buildup of all of these modal auxiliary verbs just find a better verb. But the other thing to look at is the noun, right? By narrowing the noun that lets you strengthen the the your kind of confidence in the claim. So again when you look at the hedged piece and you look at the subject of that noun or the sub the the noun in the subject position what you find is we're hedging also in the subject position right for some time now many writers in the in the plain style tradition right by contrast look at the stridident version it says every plain style writer so if you're properly hedged if you're if you're well calibrated then you're going to have a very kind of narrow noun not something that's kind overloaded with all these modifiers, right? It says writers in this style would have distrusted and that's fine. Now, at this stage, you don't have a perfect essay, but you do have the bones of it. You've put all the important parts in the places where readers expect to find them. But the next thing you need to do is make sure that your readers have a smooth experience when they're working their way through your sentences and paragraphs. So, watch this video next because it's going to give you four paragraph patterns that'll imbue your pros with a sense of flow. So, be sure to go check it out.
