TITLE: I learned a system for writing effortlessly
DATE: 20260426
URL: https://youtu.be/_ribgj7VIGc
SOURCE: en-orig

Most writers use their note-taking software as a filing cabinet, but this system turns it into a windmill. So, today, I'm going to teach you an unconventional system for nonfiction writing that'll help you transform notes into manuscripts. This is a system that gets smarter every time you use it. One where your ideas churn, connect, and develop on their own, and one that outputs valuable writing almost automatically. This only became possible when I learned how to integrate AI into my second brain the right way. So, let's start with the goal. The purpose of a system is what it does. And what this system does is help you write valuable nonfiction. So, to understand value, it helps to remember something that Elon Musk said. A successful business is one whose outputs are more valuable than its inputs. And that's exactly what this system does. It converts inputs into valuable outputs. So, the outputs are the content that you create, whether it's essays, newsletters, scripts, whatever it is you're working on. But, what are the inputs? And what's inside the machine that adds value to them? Well, at a high level, the system has two zones. So, there's inside the vault and outside the vault. Now, outside the vault is basically just life and culture flowing through you. It's the raw material that we bring and churn into valuable outputs, extracting resources from life and processing them into forms that your audience actually enjoys consuming. So, the goal here is to capture everything that you think could be valuable to your thinking. And then we process it through the system, and what you'll be left with is a highly concentrated idea that you can write about on demand. And so, outside the vault, there are essentially two streams of input. The first is from culture, and that's everything that you consume: books, essays, podcasts, articles. These all go into the sources folder, and you save them there raw and unprocessed. You're not analyzing them in the sources folder, you're just collecting them there. And Obsidian actually does have a great feature, a great add-on that you can use to save something that you might um find valuable later. So, let's say for example, you found an essay that you wanted to save, you can just you know, you can read it there on the website, or you can just come up here to the Obsidian Clipper, and it formats everything perfectly into markdown for you, and will save it right into your sources folder. So, you allow that, and then you get just a totally raw, unprocessed um essay that you can come back to later if you so choose. And the second stream of input is what I call life. Now, these could be conversations, dreams, thoughts, experiences. Well, so let's say you had a conversation with a friend, and now you're walking away, you want to bring it in and think about it a little bit more. So, what you can do here is pull out your phone, do a voice recording, and then run that transcript through AI to clean it up, and save it into your vault as a fleeting note, which we'll talk about a little bit more in a second. But, note we have a folder here called fleeting notes. That's where sources from life go. Now, as I mentioned, one thing that I highly recommend bringing into this system are your dreams. It's so helpful to your writing to have a dream log. Freud said that dreams are the royal road to your unconscious, and I have found that to be true. The unconscious is the source of your creativity, the source of your vision. So, the more that you can harness this and learn to understand the language of your unconscious, the more it's going to color the outputs and give your writing what we call a unique style. And so, how do you use this system once you've brought these things in? Well, everything starts with a daily note. So, here is a template that I run every day. I just click on the day and it pulls up a blank template. I've been writing a little bit today, and so it's filled out. But, on this template, there are essentially two things. One, there's a function that pulls in all the notes that I've written or edited today. It just searches the date function and indexes them here. And the second one is uh to-do list for the day. I'm going to list two or three high-leverage activities that I want to achieve that day with links to the relevant files. Now, how do you choose what to work on today? Well, I also have a weekly note that we'll talk about in a moment, but that's basically how I choose my daily to-do list. Every week, I make a weekly review, which we'll talk about momentarily, and then I itemize some some things I want to accomplish that week. And so, when I'm making my daily note, I just look at the weekly note and I pull two or three high-leverage activities from that weekly note. But, essentially, this is where the entire system begins with the daily note. And the great thing about using these daily notes is that you're left with a calendar where you can just go back months or years and and find out what it was you were working on on any given day. I've been doing this for many years, and so now I can just click back months and even years ago to see what I was working on and what I was thinking about. And because in this I'm integrating not only the the kind of projects that I'm working on, but also my dreams and my journal and everything, it's a really rich source to trace the development of your thinking. And that gets supercharged when we add AI to it. But, before we talk about AI, I need to show you what happens to the inputs when we pull them through the daily note and into the system. Well, whenever the inputs come into the system, they go into three kinds of notes. Each one is like a refinement of the last one. So, let me show you how this works with a real example. So, last week I saw a tweet from Dan Koe, who said something to the effect of, "If you don't write, you can't think." And I saw that tweet and I thought, "This might be taking it a little bit too far." And that really puzzled me because I've been arguing quite strongly about this idea that, you know, writing is thinking. So, I thought, "What's going on here?" Like, I had an intuition that Dan was wrong, but I hadn't yet sketched out my argument. So, going back to the system, I had an experience, or call it a conversation on Twitter. And so, what I did is I wrote about it. I wrote about that experience in a fleeting note. Just in an ugly, unprocessed kind of way, I jotted down whatever it was I was thinking about it. And the great thing about these fleeting notes is that I have a function now, I can do it right now. I have a function that automatically generates a numeric ID. So, it gives the year, the month, the day, and even the time. So, I can generate these, you know, one of these every second. And it gives it a unique number. And that's great because it doesn't make you think about like, "What's the title of this note?" And so, it allows you to think about them in a lot less of a structured way. So, I just create one of these notes. I I hammer out whatever I think, and then it'll appear right here in my um my daily my daily note index. And so, the purpose of this note is just to catch the experience without any friction. And it gets saved there as a fleeting note. But, as I was writing about it, I remembered an essay, a source, that I had read months ago, which was an essay by Cormac McCarthy called The Kekule Problem. Now, this is an essay where McCarthy is trying to understand why so many problems in science and mathematics are solved in dreams. The author basically wanted to know why mathematicians and scientists would often work on a problem for months, go to sleep, and then find the solution arriving as a riddle in a dream. And the reason that it connected to this exchange that I had with Dan Coe is that his answer involved the relationship between the unconscious and language. And he says at one point in this essay, quite confidently, that we don't use language to think. Yeah, here it is. He says, "But if you believe that you actually use language in the solving of problems, I wish that you would write to me and tell me how you go about it." Which is hilarious. He wants you to use language to explain how you go about using language to solve problems. So, that's a hilarious joke, but I remembered that line and it I saw some connection to this exchange that I had with Dan Coe. So, now I've got an open loop. Like, I'm thinking about this problem. If If McCarthy is right and we don't use language to think, then what does it mean to say writing is thinking? And so, I pulled up that essay, which I had saved in my sources folder, and I opened up alongside of it a literature note. So, a literature note is a lot like marginalia. It's not highlights, you know, there's um a popular integration that people use with their Kindle called a Readwise, which basically just pulls in all of your highlights unprocessed, but I really don't find that helpful because I find quotes on their own are not valuable. They're only valuable insofar as they prompt you to think. So, a literature note, by contrast, is kind of like a record of your dialogue with the text. So, here's my literature note for that essay of Cormac McCarthy's, where I save, you know, the quote that prompted me to think, and just jot down a little note that I think alongside of it. And notice that a lot of them are not hyperlinked, so I'm not going to use a lot of these, but this is a record of my dialogue with the text. And so the goal here is not to summarize the entire article, it's not to write a thesis on it, it's not to write a review of it and publish that. The goal of a literature note is just to talk back to the text. And so a professor once told me that if you want to read actively, all you need to do is ask, "Where are things the same and where are they different?" And so that's basically what I do whenever I'm consuming any of this media. I'm going through it and I've got that question running in the background. So there I went through this essay, and as I was just making this commentary, I was asking myself that question. "Where are things the same as this idea writing as thinking, where are they different?" And so this triggered all of my own ideas from the text. And so as you note, you know, there are many notes here and a lot of them are interesting, but they remain unprocessed. They're not relevant to my thinking right now. The ones that are highlighted are the ones that I've converted into my own notes, and that is the third kind of note, which is a permanent note. And so if a fleeting note is like a scrap of paper and a literature note is like marginalia, the things that you scribble on the margins of your book, then a permanent note is an atomic idea. It's an idea. Okay, this folder, permanent notes, is what some people might call a second brain. So the goal is to write down a single self-contained idea in your own words with a link to the source and a link to another note that's already in the system. So if we go to permanent notes, okay, so here's a note that I created from that Cormac McCarthy essay. It has a link to the source and the idea is written up here in my own words, and I also link it to another note in the vault. I actually that note is not an idea, but it's a question, and I think that's a perfectly valid use of permanent notes. It's a question that I'm developing. So, the idea here is that we don't think with language. Language is an unconscious process, and that links back to this note, which is is language used to think? And so, essentially this note is starting a train which says no, language is not used to think. Now, later I might find a good argument for how language is used to think, and that would become 3.1A2. I'll talk a little bit more about these numbers in just a second, but the point here is just to see how these three types of notes are distinct from each other. The permanent notes represent the kind of most refined version of your thinking, and they link to other notes importantly. So, it really does become a kind of web that's growing here. As you can see, you start to get these links and webs of your notes as you link them together. And so, the goal with these permanent notes is to write down a single self-contained idea in your own words with a link to the source and a link to a note that's already in the system. So, I had the idea writing is thinking. And now, I have a new idea, which is that we do not use language to do our thinking. So, when I brought that note into the permanent notes folder, I looked for a note to link it to because I wanted those two ideas to talk to each other. And that's the purpose of the alphanumeric ID, which is not to create a rigid hierarchy, but to make sure that no note is orphaned. Every new leaf of knowledge needs to attach to the tree somewhere. And this is actually something else that Elon Musk said, whenever he was asked how he learns difficult things so quickly and so thoroughly. He said, "It's important to view knowledge as a semantic tree. You need to see how the leaves connect to the big branches." The structure that emerges through these connections is not a strict hierarchy. It's more like a rhizome. It's really messy, associative, organic, but it starts to represent the webs and connections of your thinking. All these red notes are permanent notes. Now, once these permanent notes start to accumulate, patterns start to emerge on their own. And so, for example, just recently I was processing a podcast conversation between a scientist and a Lacanian psychoanalyst, which is an unusual pairing since scientists don't usually have much patience for humanistic thinkers like Lacan. But, one of the first things the psychoanalyst said was that Lacan doesn't reject the idea of truth. He grounds truth in what he calls the truth of desire. And so, I turned that idea into a permanent note, not because I necessarily believe it. You know, permanent notes can be ideas that you don't agree with or that you're not sure about or they can even be questions. I created this permanent note because I thought it was interesting. That's it. And then, a few days later, I came across a tweet from David Deutsch, who's a philosopher and a physicist. And he was saying something quite similar. He said that you couldn't determine action based on long-term goals because you might be making errors in the present that you won't catch until much farther down the line. So, instead, he said, "You should pursue your desire in the moment and then use long-term goals as a way of critiquing it." And I thought, "Huh, that's exactly what I was just writing about." So, it's this really strange connection between a Lacanian psychoanalyst and a philosopher physicist that surfaced through the system. So, now I've got the same idea being made by a Lacanian theorist of and a physicist. And so, I started adding my own value to it by noting where things are the same and where they're different. And so, once you process your ideas from fleeting notes through literature notes into permanent notes, these start forming the kind of framework that you use to understand the world. And you're going to be really surprised by what you notice start to connecting to that framework. And so, by now you might notice that most of this system comes from the Zettelkasten method. And I tried to build this many times over the years, but it always felt like a filing cabinet, never the living system that it promised to be. But, this all changed when I brought AI into it. But, to be honest, I was quite reluctant to incorporate AI into this because I really don't like AI coming in to do the thinking for us. So, the key principle here is that I wanted AI to work on my thinking instead of doing it. So, more practically, I didn't want AI to be processing my inputs. I didn't want it to be summarizing articles or telling me what the main ideas are or pointing out connections between my notes. I wanted that thinking to be mine. But, one problem with this original Zettelkasten method is that on any given week, you might be writing about all kinds of different unconnected ideas. In my case, I was writing about a Lacanian philosopher and then reading a study about sociology and then taking notes about how to use my camera. Very different territories. And so, by the end of the week, I'd often forgotten what I was writing about on Monday. So, I wanted a way to see the macro patterns across my thinking over time. And so, I set up three AI agents to run weekly. They all have access to my human layer. Most of them only have access to my The purple ones down here only have access to the permanent notes folder. Um this layer has access to the entire vault. I say they're on different layers because they cannot rewrite, delete, or touch these. They can only read them. So, what are these three AI agents? Well, the first one is the keyword index. So, you know how you can open the back of a nonfiction book and just scan the index in the back and then jump to a given topic and read a few pages on it. Well, what if you could do that for your entire second brain? That's what this AI agent does. It scans all of my personal notes and identifies major themes and surfaces connections across the vault. So, I may be writing about language and the unconscious on one side of the graph and then writing and cognition on the other. Well, this AI might notice patterns between them and then it'll create a higher-order link. And so, this keyword index is really a source of serendipity. Like, I can just browse through all the index and jump back into old threads that I forgot I wrote about. Now, for the second AI agent, what if you had a Wikipedia site just for your second brain? Well, that's what this AI agent does using two kinds of notes. Hub notes are like maps of all the notes that I've created on a given topic organized into headings. They allow me to scan the major trains of thought that I've written about. And now, structure notes are more like Wikipedia pages. These give a narrative synthesis on any topic built entirely from my permanent notes. Now, all these notes are generated and updated weekly and both will flag gaps and underdeveloped areas, open questions that I've left unanswered, links that I haven't followed up on, and areas that are underdeveloped. Now, the third and final AI agent is the weekly review. This runs every Sunday morning. It goes through all the notes in my human layer, including the sources, fleeting notes, literature notes, and permanent notes, and manuscripts. And it gives me a summary. That is, tasks that I've completed, patterns that are starting to appear in my dreams, themes from my fleeting notes, key ideas from literature and permanent notes. And it compares what I did last week against my quarterly goals and reminds me of the remaining time in the quarter and then suggests what I might focus on in the coming week, which is really helpful whenever I'm planning out the week ahead. And now, because it includes essentially my journal and my dreams, I'm not going to show you that note. It's a little bit personal, but essentially every Sunday, I read this note and then make my plan for the coming week and then check that weekly plan each morning when I'm on my daily note and writing out my to-do list. But, I have to say, the single most powerful feature of this AI layer is the Q&amp;A function, which is a skill that lets me talk to the entire vault. And so, to show you how powerful this is, I'll give you a quick example. So, recently I was having a conversation with a friend about South Korea's fertility rate. It's one of the lowest in the world. He argued that it was due to economic factors. At least that's what everybody says, "I can't afford children." But, I pushed back. I said, "South Korea has the lowest fertility rate in the world, but the government subsidizes nearly everything for children up to age five. So, the economics argument doesn't really hold." So, then I thought, "Why are individuals still saying, "I can't afford a child?" And then the idea occurred to me spontaneously that maybe this wasn't really an individual decision. Something is happening at the group level, an emergent phenomena in the group that trickles down into what feels like a personal choice. It's kind of like how individual ants make very simple decisions at the micro level, but those decisions produce macro level patterns that serve the needs of the colony perfectly, but which you could never predict by watching a single ant. The individual thinks they're in control, but there's no central controller. It's actually just the hive making the decision. So, this was a new idea for me. It's one that I didn't quite know what I thought about it yet. And so, I opened up the Q&amp;A function, described this idea, and asked, "Have I ever thought about this before? Do I have any notes that might help me think about it or process it?" And so, when I asked that question, the system surfaced a web of closely connected notes that I'd totally forgotten about. And it gave me this high-level summary of how they all connect. And so, now I know what sources and what fleeting notes to process next. And this is so powerful because it gives me exactly the sources and fleeting notes that I can process and bring in to my own permanent notes. These Q&amp;A outputs go in their own folder. They don't modify my permanent notes or any other part of the human vault. So, next week, whenever these wiki agents are going through my vault to process new hub notes and structure notes, they won't incorporate these AI outputs as that would muddy the waters and dilute my thinking. The AI is helping me navigate through my vault, but it's not rewriting it. This system works because it keeps the thinking yours. And I have to say a lot of people misunderstood the promise that AI would help writers. They thought it meant that AI would help them write. But you don't want AI doing your writing for you, and you don't want it doing your thinking for you. What you want is what this system delivers. AI as a navigation layer over a knowledge graph that you've built yourself. Now, if you want to build a system like this, I've created a free resource that you can download along with a 10-day email sequence that will walk you through it step by step with templates and instructions, starting with the daily note, building the habit from fleeting notes to literature notes to permanent notes, and showing you how to use AI to get the windmill turning on its own. But if you want to learn how to write without AI, then you need to watch this video next because it's going to give you my expert writing system, which is designed to help writers do their own thinking and convert that thinking into value for readers. So be sure to go check it out.
