TITLE: I Analysed 100 Opening Paragraphs. Here's What Makes Readers Obsessed.
DATE: 20260111
URL: https://youtu.be/ePQoPNHZ7UY
SOURCE: en-orig

Readers don't care about your ideas because you're opening your text with hooks instead of value. So, today I'm going to show you what I learned after analyzing over 100 introductions from professional and academic genres. You're going to learn three critical things that every writer must have in their introduction to make readers instantly want to read the rest of the piece. Whether it's a newsletter, white paper, research report, sales page, or a book proposal. This three-part pattern for introductions is not just a list of style tips. It's a powerful structure that I've noticed in the most effective and persuasive documents. It's designed to create value for your readers. And it's helped my clients get their research funded, published, pitch startups, and convert readers into buyers. And by the way, if you're new here, my name is William. I'm an English professor at one of the top universities in South Korea. And for 10 years, I've been teaching writing from the reader perspective. And to show you the number one mistake that I notice in so many non-fiction introductions, we're going to take a look at a model essay by George Mack about high agency. Here's how he describes it. After 7 months of writing, I finished my essay. I think agency might be the most important idea of the 21st century. So, to understand what's wrong here, picture your reader like somebody walking through a crowded market with their arms full trying to get home. Now imagine there are two vendors calling out to them. The first vendor says, "Step right up. I spent nine months perfecting this amazing product and I truly believe it's one of the most important inventions of the year." Vendor two says, "Need to carry all that easier? This bag has reinforced handles that won't rip." So which one are they stopping for? Well, obviously the second one because the first vendor is talking about themselves, their efforts, their beliefs, and their product. The second vendor is talking about the customer's problem and offering them a solution. Most writers are like vendor number one. Even the good ones like George Mack. Working on an essay for seven months and saying that you think it's important does not create value. So, to find out what does, let's take a look at the introduction to George Max's essay. Now, George didn't ask me to edit this, and since the essay got pretty popular on its own, I think it's fair to say that he doesn't need my help. But I chose this essay for three reasons. First, it's got a good idea that's worth spreading. Second, the essay was relatively successful, so any critiques I make aren't punching down, they're punching up. And third, despite the success of this essay, it's a perfect example of the kind of writing mistake that I see in so many introductions. So, here's how George opens. Warning, this is not doom scrolling. It's an idea so simple yet effective, it may change how you view reality. It takes 30 minutes on average to read. What is high agency? I believe high agency might be the most important idea of the 21st century. When I first learned of High Agency, it felt like a secret that had been hidden from me. So, what is it? In a 1964 public inquiry into whether the film The Lovers should be banned for its adult content, Supreme Court Judge Justice Potter Stewart was asked to define pornography. He replied with the ultimate non-defin, I know it when I see it. High agencies is one of those I know it when I see it ideas. And once you see it, you can't unsee it. So before I explain it, let's see it. So do you see what's happening here? George Mack is telling us that he thinks the topic is important. He's telling us it felt like a secret to him. But unless you already care about what George Mack thinks or you've already heard Eric Weinstein talk about high agency first, there's nothing in this text that makes you care about high agency. This introduction offers only a topic. it doesn't motivate us to care about it. So, the introduction fails to answer the reader's number one question. So, what readers don't read non-fiction for entertainment. They read when they perceive the text as valuable. And value is not a function of whether the author thinks that something is important. Value is a function of problems and their solutions. So, here is a three-part introduction structure that the most effective essays use to not merely introduce a topic, but to establish value. Value is a function of problems. So, the job of the introduction is to set up a problem. But, slow down, Mr. Uncensored. It's not time to just jump in off the top ropes with your hot take. Think of it like this. Imagine you're at a party and someone walks up to you and immediately says, "Everything you believe about success is wrong." Well, your first reaction is probably to be defensive, maybe even annoyed. You're definitely not going to say, "Oh, wow. Tell me more." But what if instead that person says, "You know how everyone says hard work and patience lead to success?" Well, that's true for a lot of people and then they challenged it. That's a totally different feeling. And that difference is because they found common ground first. They acknowledge something that you already believe before asking you to reconsider it. So, let's go back to George Max's essay. He wants us to adopt his idea of high agency, which is people who take charge and make things happen. But instead of diving straight into here's what high agency is, watch what happens if we start with something that readers already accept. And that would be many people sit back, wait for orders, and don't take charge on their own. a problem so pervasive in workplaces that economists call it the principal agent problem. Now, at this point, you're probably nodding along, like you've seen that behavior before, and maybe you've even been that person sometimes. So, you're comfortable. You feel like the writer gets you. That's the setup. That's your common ground. And the beautiful part of opening this way is that once you've got readers nodding along, that's when you can flip the script on them. You've lined up the dominoes and now you can knock them over. So before you challenge your reader thinking, you need to establish common ground that they already accept, which is what I call establishing the status quo. And here's how to do it in three steps. First, it's a good idea to invert your idea. So, whatever idea it is that you're building towards, you should think about the opposite of that because that's going to be a really powerful way to demonstrate the value. Like, if you can get your reader nodding along at the start of the essay and then have the essay oriented toward exactly the opposite of that, then your reader is going to be given the feeling that there's something about the world that they don't understand. Second, you need to think about what do your readers already believe. Look for something that they're not going to dispute, something that seems totally obvious or widely accepted. This is going to be your shared context. And you can establish it in three different ways. All right? So, you can open with the historical background. So, that could be something like for decades taking initiative has been key to professional success. Or you could open with a recent event such as a recent survey showed 70% of employees feel stuck in their roles. Or you could open by establishing a common belief, something like most people believe success comes from those who work hard and stay patient. So the goal here isn't to open with one of these cliched hooks. It's to establish common ground and to get your reader nodding along. Next, you want to state that idea clearly. Don't overexlain it. You can do this later if your reader needs more context, but your only goal here is to get them thinking, "Yeah, yeah, yeah, I know that." Here, you're setting up common ground just so that you can challenge it. And third, what you want to do is set up the contrast. So, whatever shared context you choose, think of it as the setup for a butt or a however, because whatever it is you establish in the status quo, that's what you're going to flip on its head. So, make sure that it's something that deserves to be challenged. All right. So, now that you've got your reader nodding along with the status quo, they're comfortable. They think that they know where everything is going. Bam, surprise. You've been one step ahead of them all along, and now you're going to make them uncomfortable. That's what a good problem statement does. It points to the instability of what seemed stable, and it shows your reader the cost of staying where they are. So going again to our high agency example, a problem statement could be something like this. But a trend called low agency thinking is now spreading through workplaces and communities. People with low agency don't just hesitate, they actively avoid taking action even when they could easily solve their own problems. Consequently, they miss opportunities, stall their careers, and regret their earlier choices. And it's not just hurting individuals, it's slowing down entire organizations. So this shift is taking us from yeah some people are passive to this is actively costing individuals and organizations something precious. That's a problem. And problems have two parts that you need to nail. The first part is the condition where we show the reader what's actually wrong or unstable. And here for our example I've signaled it with the word but. So here's what's wrong with the status quo. A trend called the low agency thinking is now spreading through workplaces. People who low with low agency don't just hesitate, they actively avoid. So we've got the description of what's wrong with the status quo. And then we move to the consequence or the cost of the status quo, which is that these people miss opportunities. They sell on their careers. So that's for individuals. But what about if our readers are CEOs or entrepreneurs? Well, it's not just hurting individuals. It's also hurting entire organizations. So, we've called out the reader. We've said, "Here's what you believe. Here's what's wrong with you believe. And here's the cost of continuing to believe that. Here's what here's a bad thing that will happen if we don't fix this problem that we established right here." Without that cost, your reader can just shrug and say, "So what?" A problem is only a problem when the reader cares about it. So there needs to be either a cost that they don't want to pay or a benefit that they want to attain by solving it. So here are three steps to setting up the problem in your introduction. First, of course, you need to state the condition. And a really good way to do that is with these transition words like but or however. Now, sometimes those words can really be kind of overused in a passage, but I think if you reserve it to just this purpose of announcing the problem, at least in your opening, that is going to serve as a big signpost for your reader that like here is the problem. Second, look at that problem and pass it through the so what test. So, in order to do this, you need to imagine your specific reader. And you can imagine talking to that person and that person then saying to you so what. So whatever you answer to that so what that is the consequence or the benefit that that specific reader will care about. You can't really announce a consequence or a benefit without thinking about specific readers. So you can't think about general audiences here. You need to think about who is the person who's going to be reading this and what do they care about. And third, you need to remember to keep the condition and the consequence very close together because if the condition has no cost, then it's just not a problem. Readers need to see both before they will care enough about your idea to keep on reading. So, at this point in your introduction, you have made your reader uncomfortable. You've pointed out what's wrong with their thinking and you've shown them what it's costing them. So, what comes next? Well, if you just leave them hanging there, they're going to be frustrated and annoyed with you. Oh, great. Thanks for telling me that everything I understand about the world is wrong. Well, what am I supposed to do about it? And at this point, there are two common ways that introductions fail. The first mistake is that writers will launch into a 20inute explanation of the background of their idea before telling readers what it actually is. It's like someone asking, "What time is it?" and you responding with a full lecture on how to build a watch. And the second mistake that writers will make is that they leave the solution vague. So you say something like, "We need to think differently about this." Well, all right, of course, but how? What specifically should I do or what should I think? In other words, your reader needs to know immediately what you're offering. Now, not all the details, but just the promise and a general sense of the direction that you're going in. So, going back to George's high agency essay, here's what a solution preview might look like. High agency isn't something you're born with. It can be developed. All it takes is to recognize specific patterns and to practice small behaviors that compound over time. This essay will show you exactly what those patterns are and how to start building them today. Now, of course, I don't think what I've written here is perfectly polished. You could do a lot with this, but what I want you to focus on are the functions here. Look at what this part of the introduction does. It says there's a solution. It's achievable and it's not about changing your personality. And I'm going to give you actionable steps. So now the reader knows where you're going to take them and they can decide whether they want to join you for the ride. So this part of the introduction is called the solution. It answers the problem that you've set up earlier in the introduction. So state it clearly so that readers know exactly where you're going to take them. And really there are two kinds of solutions depending on what kind of a problem that you're dealing with. So a practical problem involves actions and behaviors. The solution to a practical problem tells readers what they should do. But if your idea involves not what people should do, but something more conceptual like what we don't know and what we don't understand, something like what causes low agency, well, your solution isn't going to provide them action steps, it's going to provide them understanding. In other words, someone needs to change what they think. And so, here's the three-part formula for introductions that actually make readers care. The first part is the status quo which is a brief introduction to something that is widely accepted to be true. Then there is the problem which is made of two pieces, a condition and a consequence. And then only then is the reader ready to accept your idea as the solution to a problem that they care about. Now, as an option, you can also open your essay with what's called a prelude. So that could be a statistic, an anecdote, a quote, or even a meme. In George Mac's essay, he uses memes a lot to get the idea across. And I think a tastefully chosen meme for an internet essay is a nice touch. But if your problem is good enough, then you really don't need a prelude. The problem itself should be interesting on its own. And this is something that doesn't get taught enough in the world of non-fiction. Readers don't care about topics. They care about problems and solutions, but fiction writers, they know this by heart. So, watch this video next because it's going to show you how a Pulitzer Prizewinning writer helped turn his friend who was an unknown researcher into a thought leader who got published in the Harvard Business Review. And that article is still one of their most widely read articles of all time. So, be sure to go check it out.
