TITLE: How to Articulate Your Thoughts More Clearly than 99% of Writers
DATE: 20260118
URL: https://youtu.be/nsa44tXal7A
SOURCE: en-orig

Your words aren't having the impact that you want because you're writing the way that you speak and not the way that readers read. The way that you speak is full of verbal ticks that make your ideas sound dull. It's because when we speak, our mouth often moves faster than we can think. So, we use these fillers to maintain fluency while searching for the next word. Great for speaking, terrible for writing. That's because readers process information differently. They don't want you to write like you speak. If they did, they wouldn't be readers. They'd be listeners. So readers want your writing to be like computer code. Simple, elegant, and efficient. Give them bloated, inarticulate writing, and they'll struggle to understand your ideas, no matter how valuable your ideas are. So, in this video, I'm going to show you what I've learned in 10 years of teaching writing from the reader's perspective. This semester, I used these principles to help one client get into MIT on a full ride PhD and another to obtain grant funding for a startup that they spun out of their own research. And to be clear, these clients are brilliant on their own, but like many experts, you could have all the talent in the world and it won't make a lick of difference if you don't know how to write about it. So, let me give you an example. If I write, in my personal opinion, it is necessary that we should not ignore the opportunity to think over each and every suggestion offered. That's clear. It's not difficult to understand the intended meaning, and there aren't any mistakes in the grammar, but it sounds dull and more importantly, it makes the writer sound inarticulate for three reasons. First, opinion is always personal. So, we don't need in my personal opinion. And since this statement is an opinion, we don't even need to say in my opinion. Second, think over and not ignore both mean the same thing, which is consider. We can just delete that. And each and every is redundant. We can probably just go with every. And by definition, suggestions are offered. So we don't need to say suggestion offered. So when we clean it up, we could express exactly the same message with a sentence like this. We should consider every suggestion. Now, why does that work better? I mean, this sentence is shorter, yes, but the point is not simply to shorten sentences. Sentence length doesn't actually matter if you know how to shape your sentences properly, but that's another lesson. The reason that this second sentence is better is compression. It cuts redundancy and bloat, which puts less cognitive load on your reader and articulates your ideas clearly. So, how do you make sure that your writing is compact and efficient? Well, there are five things that you can do to sharpen your ideas. Three of them are about pruning and two of them involve adding back in. So, if you want your ideas to land not only with clarity but with force, implement these five writing techniques to start. Why do so many experts sound vague and uncertain in their writing? Well, I think it's because they've been following one of the worst pieces of writing advice out there, which is write the way that you speak. This really misleads writers. It forces them to fill up their writing with these verbal ticks. And the problem is that when we're speaking, our brain can't keep up with our mouth. So, we use a lot of filler words, which is, of course, words like um and a, but also a set of more common words that you're probably using in your writing without even realizing it. And they're really watering down your message. So, if you learn to identify and eliminate these words, you're going to become more precise and you'll be able to establish yourself as an authority in the mind of your reader. These words are like throat clearing before you speak. They're nervous habits that dilute your message before you even begin. So for example, consider the following sentence. Student engagement actually depends on certain elements that basically involve curiosity more than any particular curriculum. So here we've got a few filler words like actually, certain, basically that sound perfectly natural when we're speaking, but in the mind of your reader, they turn your message into something that's bloated, flabby, and imprecise. So when you remove these filler words, you get something much leaner. Student engagement depends on I can just remove this whole thing. Curiosity more than any particular curriculum more than curriculum. That's just an example. But here are some other filler words that belong in spoken language but not your writing. actually, basically, certain, various, particularly, really, virtually, individual, generally, given, practically. These words, of course, they have their own purpose. Every word has a purpose, but in general, they are the culprits of bloated writing and they add virtually no meaning to your text. They're like verbal static. So, get them out. The idea here is that in your writing, you want to be ruthless in trying to pare down your message. The point is not just to have short sentences. It's to cut the fat and make your writing as lean as possible so that you can achieve clarity through minimalism. By the way, if you want to learn to write well, then you are going to love my free newsletter, Writer Science. Link is down below the like button. Speaking of writing that seems vague and bloated and unclear and imprecise, there's another category of words that writers use without really thinking about it. They think it makes them sound more authoritative and complete, knowledgeable and authoritative, when in fact it just makes them sound redundant and repetitive. This habit dates back centuries, and back then it had a purpose, but today it just sounds like overkill. These are called dublets. Various and multiple. Think and believe. Fully and completely, true and accurate, each and every. First and foremost, any and all, basic and fundamental. These doubled words originated when English writers would pair French or Latin words together with Anglo-Saxon words. It was a way of showing that they were learned. For example, aid and a bet. Well, aid comes from French, while a bet comes from old French. Null and void. Well, null is Latin and void is French. Peace and quiet. Peace is French and quiet is Latin. During the Norman conquest and the centuries that followed, using these pairs demonstrated to your reader that you knew multiple languages, so you established yourself as an authority. But these phrases still hang around in our lexicon today. But modern readers don't have any use for them. So whenever you find yourself using one of these dublets, just choose the strongest one and move on. The thing that's making your ideas to sound imprecise and dull is actually the hardest one to catch. Mastering this is what separates competent writers from exceptional ones. So you know whenever you read a phrase like I saw it with my own eyes, well it's a common enough expression, but when you really start to think about it, you've got to say, well, of course you saw it with your own eyes. I mean, what else are you going to see it with? This is a particular kind of redundancy and catching turns of phrase like this. Well, that's what readers use to judge between writers who are paying attention and those who just don't know what they're doing. So, it really comes down to three types of redundancy. Modifiers, categories, and general implications. These are words that are implied by other words. So, let's start with modifiers. These are the words that contain their modifier within them. So for example, look at this sentence. Do not attempt to anticipate upcoming trends that will totally transform education because previous experience shows that it is the ultimate result of small shifts that suddenly astonishes us more. This sentence is filled with words that you just don't need because other words in the sentence already carry that meaning. The word anticipate already implies upcoming. So you don't need to say upcoming trends. The word transform already contains the meaning of the word totally. So we don't need that. You don't partially transform. It's a transient. You're transing your form. Experience always happens in the past. So we don't need to say previous experience. And results always happen at the end. So we don't need to say ultimate result. And astonishment always happens all of a sudden. I mean you can't really be gradually astonished by anything. So we don't need to say suddenly. Cut these redundant modifiers and you're left with something much more precise. Do not attempt to anticipate trends that will transform education because experience shows that it is the result of small shifts that astonishes us more. So what are some examples of words that you can cut from your own writing? Well, you kind of have to develop your own ear for this, but there are some common culprits like core essentials, basic fundamentals, future plans, free gift, consensus of opinion in actual reality. You get the idea? Well, the next type of word that's unnecessary because it is implied by other words is categories. So, here's a quick example. During that phase of development, the interface design became intuitive in nature and responsive in function. Every word in this sentence implies its category. So phase is a unit of development. Interface is an aspect of design and responsive is obviously referring to function. Remove those and you get something more like this. During that phase, the interface became intuitive and responsive. Other common culprits in redundant categories are phrases like large in size, unusual in nature, round in shape, and at an early time. These are redundancies you're just going to have to watch out for. There's no solid rule or principle except to say that you don't usually need to specify the category that something belongs to. It's already implied by the word itself. Now, sometimes when you're fixing this kind of mistake, you're going to need to convert adjectives into adverbs. So, for example, in the sentence, the paragraphs must be organized in a logical manner. Well, logical and manner are the same words, but you can't just delete manner. So, you need to turn it into an adverb. They they must be organized logically. All right. This last type of word that you want to delete are general implications. And honestly, these are the hardest ones to catch because the redundancy spreads across multiple words. You really just need to be a ruthless editor trying to delete as much as possible. So, for example, look at this sentence. Imagine someone attempting to learn the conventions for writing the art of poetry. So, this sentence is not imprecise because of modifiers or categories. Instead, the redundancy is spread across multiple words and phrases. So for example, the verb learn already implies the idea of trying to do something. So it's redundant to say attempting to learn. And the same thing goes for conventions. It implies writing in the genre. If you're learning about the genre of poetry, then by definition, you are learning conventions. Similarly, poetry is an art. So we don't need to say the art of poetry. And when you come to a sentence like this with the intention of removing as much as possible, you can hack away a lot of this deadwood and you'll be left with something a lot more crisp, like imagine learning the conventions of poetry. All right, so those last three points showed you all the places where you could cut extra words, but these next two are about what you can add back in. Because even after cutting all that redundancy, many writers still use five words when they could just use one. So, this is your opportunity to flex your vocabulary muscle and use the thesaurus that's been gathering dust because we are going to be finding what the French call lies, the exact right word. Take a sentence like this. As you thoroughly review what you have written to enhance clarity and identify problems of organization and flow, the thing to do before anything else is to see whether you could use concrete illustrations instead of the same concepts presented in less concrete terms. Now, in this passage, there aren't exactly words that you could cut, but we can still make this passage a lot more efficient. And the difference here is a little bit like taking a cross-country road trip versus taking a direct flight. We can't just make the road trip more efficient. We need to change the vehicle that we're taking, which means finding more precise words. And this is one of the great things about having a wide vocabulary. Many people will abuse their vocabulary and just use obscure words just because. Use a $50 word where a $5 word will do. But when you have a wider vocabulary or you know how to use a thesaurus, then you can compress your ideas and articulate them more efficiently. I mean, take this part. As you thoroughly review what you have written to enhance clarity and identify problems of organization and flow, well, that's a bit of a mouthful. What if we just turn what if we just use the verb revise? as you revise that's one word and it captures the same meaning now what about this revise what you have written well normally I don't like to use nominalizations which is where we take a clause or an action and we represent it as a noun but since the verb revise is a transitive verb it needs a it needs an object it needs something to receive the revising so it wants a direct object to receive that action And I find it a little bit awkward to use a clause as the object of an action verb. So we can take this we can take this clause and just capture it with a noun like your writing. Now what about the thing to do before anything else? Well, we could just capture that with a word like first. And then how about this structure? Use X instead of Y. Well, we could just use the verb replace. That'll save us some room. Replace concrete illustrations with the same concepts. And then how that concrete illustrations? Well, there's a word for that. That would be examples. And the same concepts presented in less concrete terms. Well, how about abractions? But now the verb replace has a slightly different structure. So, we need to switch these two things. So, we're going to put replace examples with abstractions. And that leaves us with a sentence like, "As you revise your writing, first replace abstractions with examples." This is one of the things that comes from spoken language. We use these really clumsy phrases. The reason for instead of why, despite the fact that, instead of even though or although, in the event that instead of if. in a situation where instead of when concerning the matter of instead of about. Now, once again, there's no formula for this. We just need vocabulary and alertness and the desire to pair down our writing. But one way that you can watch out for this is to look when you're editing. Just look through the words to the ideas. If you're using many words to express only a few ideas, there's probably some replacements that you could use to articulate the idea more precisely. The way to sound more articulate in your writing doesn't really have to do with using fewer words, although that is a happy byproduct. Yes, writers who ignore this principle wind up using more words than is necessary. But the reason that writing this way makes you sound inarticulate is because it forces your readers to do some mental arithmetic before they can understand your point. That's what happens when you don't write in the affirmative. Or more directly, that's what happens when you write in the negative. Negatives force your reader to take an extra step. First, they need to process your sentence and second they need to reverse it. And depending on the way you write it, this reversal can happen three, four, five times per sentence. Affirmatives are a lot more direct and they make your writing sound so much more clear. So, for example, in the sentence, do not write in the negative, well, you could switch that to write in the positive. That's simple enough, but watch what happens when negatives get compounded with other words that secretly carry negative connotations. But first, here are some simple translations. Not different, similar. Not the same, different. Not allow, prevent. Not notice, overlook. Not many, few. Not often, rarely. Not include, omit. So, that's simple enough. But the real danger comes when you compound your negatives, as in this sentence, which says, except when you have failed to submit applications without documentation, benefits will not be denied. How many times do you need to reverse this sentence in your mind? We have accept, failed, without, and not be denied. Here's what this sentence actually means. To receive benefits, submit your documents. It's so much more clear when we write it in the positive. But the worst case is when negatives combine with passive sentences and nominalizations. As we see in this sentence, which says, "There should be no submission of payments without notification of this office unless the payment does not exceed $100." What? How do we begin fixing this sentence? Well, the first thing that we need to do is to get the action out of these nouns and into verbs. So, submission becomes submit and notification becomes notify. So that would be do not submit payments and then it would be uh if you do not notify do not notify this office and then there's another clause which is like the payment does not exceed $100. So let's get exceeded out of there and we'll say unless you pay you are paying less than 100. All right. So we've got three clauses there. But we could still make this more clear by switching it into the positive because we have not not and less than. So all these negatives are not not less. So let's switch it and say if you are paying more than $100, notify this office. And at that point, we don't even need this clause at all. And so the principle here is to watch out for words that are implicitly negative. words like preclude, prevent, lack, fail, doubt, reject, avoid, deny, refuse, exclude, contradict, prohibit, bar, without, against, unless, and accept. When these words combine with explicit negatives, which are not and no, and words like that, comprehension collapses. But there is one exception to this principle. You want to keep negatives when you actually want to emphasize what not to do. Sometimes the warning is the point, but otherwise write in the positive. Compression in writing is only the start. Once you've cut the deadwood, you need to spruce things up a little bit. So, watch this video next because it breaks down 31 writing tools from some of the greatest writers of all time. Byite-siz tips that you can use right away. So, be sure to go check it out.
