TITLE: The Top 1% of Experts Think on Paper—Here's How
DATE: 20260222
URL: https://youtu.be/VkXMlrvq29o
SOURCE: en-orig

Right? So AI is turning everything into a big tub of homogeneous slop and readers are sick of it. So if you want to stand out from the rest, then the last thing you need is better prompts or a perfect outline or a proven template. In fact, that's exactly what's making your writing blend in. So in this video, I'm going to show you how the top 1% of experts use their writing as an extension of their thinking, which is what helps them stand out from the rest. the reason that most writers today sound bland and forgettable even if they're not using AI and how you can use a simple two-step process to make your own non-fiction writing more original and more valuable to readers. And by the way, if you're new here, my name is William. I'm an English professor and I help experts share their knowledge and expertise through reader focused writing. And in my 10 years of teaching academic and professional writing, I found that the top 1% of experts don't treat writing as an afterthought. They use writing as an extension of their thinking, which is a method of solving problems. And that's what makes their ideas valuable and gives them authority. I mean, think about it like this. No matter what niche you're in, if your expertise is valuable, then it answers questions and solves problems. And real problems are too complex to be worked out in your head. So you can't think first, write second. You need to use writing to do your thinking. All right, so this really got driven home for me last week when I got an email from one of my newsletter subscribers named Alexi. He was dealing with a pretty classic problem that we see in non-fiction writing, which is the tugofwar between writing and reading. and he wanted to know what the process is like because his process was too slow. And that was a serious problem for Alexi because he's a researcher. And so when your writing process is slow, your output is slow and your output is your work. So it was really important to him to get this process, this balance between reading and writing right. But he was stuck in this kind of loop. And so he says he tried first reading everything before sitting down to write. And that was a little bit like cramming before a final exam. Now, he said it was actually satisfying in some way because, well, he was satisfied of his curiosity, but it was not productive. So, then he flipped it around. He wrote first and he barely read at all. But this made him feel like a chef with an empty pantry, no ingredients, and nothing to cook. So, he was starving for ideas halfway through his draft. Total dead end. And so, his question to me was kind of interesting. He was asking how professional writers seem to write and read together. Like, what's their process like? And I'm going to tell you the solution that he came to in just a moment. But the really interesting thing about this email is that as he was typing his question out to me, his brain did a backflip and the answer arrived before he could even send it. And so the solution that he came to was that reading isn't really like raw material or fuel that you throw in the tank before you drive. Like it's not a prerequisite to the writing process. It's more like food. And so with food, ideally you don't eat just because the fridge is full. You eat only when you're hungry. And so food is a solution to the problem of hunger. And similarly with reading, you don't need to read everything upfront. You read when your writing gets hungry. When you hit a wall or you find a gap, you take a little break and you let your ideas breathe. Now, ideally, this reading activity is guided by a research question so that you're not just doing productive procrastination. But I think that was a very elegant solution that he came to. But that's not the main point. The thing that I took from this email is a lesson that most writers miss. Writing is not the final act like this neat little bow that you take after all your thinking is done. It is not on record of what you already know. Writing is thinking. And we see that a lot on writing YouTube, but I think Alexis's story is a really great demonstration of this because the act of stringing words together is what made his solution appear. I mean, in one sense, yes, like Alexi was writing me a question, but it was the act of putting his confusion into the structure of language that forced the solution that he already had within him to appear. It was the process of working out what he was confused about that made him realize this very elegant solution. And this is why waiting until you feel ready before you write is a total trap. For many of us, that moment seldom comes because the thing that makes you ready is the writing itself. So that's why one of the first things that I say to my clients is always to forget about writing something that's good, clear, or organized. They come to me and they want feedback about their writing style. But you need to use writing in this first phase as a way to generate your ideas. And once you've generated those new ideas, then you can worry about style and mechanics. But at the start, your only job is to write badly enough to find the gold on the other side of your draft. Write first, understand later. And by the way, if you want to learn the art and science of expert writing, then you are going to love my free newsletter, Writer Science. Link is down below the like button, but I realized that this is something you probably haven't been taught before, and that's kind of the point. So, to see what sets the top 1% of writers apart from the rest, we need to rewind to high school English class. If your teachers were anything like mine, then they forced you to write an outline before you wrote your essay and then to submit them together in your final submission. You remember the drill. First think, then outline. Only then, young grasshopper, may you write. Thinking and writing were treated as two separate worlds, never to touch. Except, of course, we all cheated. If you're anything like me, what you did here was you wrote the paper probably in 30 minutes the night before it was due and then you filled in the outline. Now, we were rebels at the time, but we didn't even know that we were on to something because at the expert level, this bad habit is actually the perfect strategy. Expert knowledge, whatever field you're in, is not a neat little Lego set that you can assemble in your head. Honestly, it's a lot more like a pile of tangled Christmas lights. And you can only figure out what's actually connected once you start untangling. So, the top 1% of writers do not wait until they've finished thinking to start writing. And they certainly don't write from an outline or a template. They write to do their thinking. And that's honestly the way I think about most of my drafts. Every morning, I open up a new fleeting note and I just kind of do a brain dump. It's great if you can do it like this. Just if if you have a problem that you're working on, you can write it as a question at the top of the page and then just set a timer and let yourself dream while you're writing. If you don't have a question that you're working on, then just sit down and see what comes up. These early drafts are not artifacts of your thinking. And you're not going to hand these over to readers. They're more like excavation sites. I mean, sometimes I actually think about a draft almost like a lab, like a science lab, where you're bringing different ideas into contact with each other and just seeing what kind of reactions you can get. And a lot of the time they're duds, but sometimes th this is how you get these moments of inspiration, when you make these weird combinations and you just kind of let yourself get pulled by the thread of your own curiosity. So that's why I think of them as excavation sites, your early drafts. As you write your draft, you are digging for treasure. And of course, there's a lot of dirt that you've got to get through. But this is exactly what Joan Ddian meant when she writes, "I write entirely to find out what I'm thinking." Expert writers do not wait for clarity. They write their way into it. Now, if you know exactly what you're going to say before you write, then you are not writing valuably. I'm sorry to say, you're just shuffling the same old deck around. And this is exactly the kind of writing that AI can replace. And so, very simply, if you want to stand out from the robots and everybody who's using them in their writing, then you've got to do what they can't, which is to think out loud on the page. And so, now you're probably thinking, well, wait a second. if if I can't use an outline, then how do I make sure that my draft isn't just some mess like a pile of spaghetti that I'm throwing at the wall? And that's a fair point. So, here's the strategy. It's called the reverse outline. And the way it works is it's dead simple. Step one, you write your draft. And that's where you just let your brain off the leash. Really helpful to use a timer here, but basically, you're just doing a brain dump. Now, step two, when you think you're done, you go back section by section and you slap a label on what each part actually does. So, if you can't label it, then it's either fluff or just some Frankenstein's monster of ideas. Step three, lay out those labels in order. Just look at the labels. And if the flow of them feels off, then you have just found a spot that needs some fixing. Now, ideally, those labels that you've laid out are going to correspond to the reader's questions and expectations. And so, what you end up with at the end isn't the map that you've pre-planned in some template or outline. It's the map that's going to take the reader from their current understanding to the new understanding that you're laying out for them in your document. So, the next time you finish a draft, don't just slam your laptop and walk away. Take five minutes, label each section, and I think you'll be amazed and probably horrified at what you actually wrote. And if you don't use a reverse outline like this, then you are only doing step one of the expert writing process. And to see what happens when you ignore step two, imagine this. So, you've just arrived at a restaurant and now you're talking on a phone giving them directions on how to meet you there. What are you going to say? What directions are you going to give to them? You can't simply tell them your own route. You need to consider where they're starting from and what they'll need to work through to arrive at the same destination. And this is where many experts get stuck. They're stuck inside the idea that essentially there's only one way to the restaurant. That is there's only one way to do the thinking and that's the way that the writer did it. Now if the readers are complaining about their writing then either the readers are lazy or the writer has not made their thinking clear enough. But this is not an issue of clarity. It's an issue of interference. And so the idea of interference is that the language patterns that experts use to do their thinking interfere with the reading patterns that your readers bring to process the text. So whenever you are doing your writing as thinking there are all kinds of patterns that come up. It could be just a kind of rambling exploration, bringing in a lot of background text, or you're basically just working through your own confusion and complexity step by step. But the process that you took to move through your own complexity and confusion to arrive at the answer is not necessarily the pattern that your reader is going to use when they work through your text. But the problem here is that readers are not writing professors like me. So, they don't really have the language to diagnose what's wrong with your text. So, they're not really going to say like, "Hey, [snorts] your writing patterns interfered with my reading patterns." They're going to say something like, "It's unclear," or, "It's disorganized," or, "I just couldn't get it." Whenever readers say this, they're not describing the content. They're describing the friction between the writer's thinking patterns and their own reading patterns. Like these early drafts of writing as thinking, they're supposed to be a mess. It's an incoherent mess. It's a reflection of your own thinking. And you don't even know what you think until you write about it. But the problem is, and and writers do not like it when I say this, and they don't want to believe this is true, but it's the truth. Is that you cannot just edit this draft. There's no amount of clarity or organization or, you know, move this comma over here, change this word to that word. There's no amount of those line edits that you can do to make the writer's draft more clear for readers. The issue is not clarity. It's the interference between the patterns that each of you take to move from where you start and where they start to the same destination. So the top 1% of writers understand that the route that they took to an idea is almost never the same route that the reader needs. So revision is not just a matter of polishing sentences. It's rebuilding the path from scratch, step by step, starting from where the reader is and taking them to where you want them to be. So those are the two steps to expert writing. The first half is writing for the writer. The second half is writing for the reader. And those are two different documents. But honestly, only half of your expertise in expert writing is knowing your subject. And the other half is knowing your reader. So let me give you a concrete example of how expert writing works and the obsessive focus that it brings to their specific readers. Back in 1996, the economist W. Brian Arthur publishes an article in the Harvard Business Review called Increasing Returns and the New World of Business and it blows up. And that article is still making waves 30 years later. It's a fantastic read. It's incredibly well written and I highly recommend it. I'm going to link to it at the end of this video, but let me tell you a little about it. The interesting thing about this article is that Arthur didn't write it alone. He spent 4 days obsessing over every sentence with his friend, the novelist Cormack McCarthy. Yes, he's the guy who wrote The Road, No Country for Old Men, and he's widely considered to be one of the greatest American authors of all time. Now, anybody who's read McCarthy knows that he's very spare and he can be ruthless in his edits. He was very inspired by Hemingway. But honestly, the really interesting thing that I want to draw your attention to in this article is not the words that they cut, but the words that they chose to keep. So, keep in mind, this is an academic economist, and he's writing in the Harvard Business Review, which is a prestigious publication, but specifically, it's a publication that's read by people who are practicing business strategies. So, that would be consultants and CEOs and those kinds of people. He's not writing to an academic audience. So notice that Arthur could have written, I don't know, something like early market entry produces compounding benefits. But McCarthy would not let him write something like that for this audience. So instead, he writes, "It pays to hit the market first. It pays." Isn't that interesting? You would never find that phrase in an academic journal, but that's exactly the point. This phrase is an uppercut to hit his specific readers right in the values. The readers of the Harvard Business Review are people who wake up in the morning thinking about returns. So, it pays is a code word. It says, "Hey reader, this is about your world and this matters to you." And this approach is everywhere in this article. You see words like strategy, competitive advantage, market lockin. Not the dry technical terms that you would expect to find in a dusty economics journal, but the ones that resonate with that audience in that context and signal value to those specific readers. Code words like this are like a secret handshake with your reader to let them know that you understand them and you speak their language. But the reason that readers value them is not because they carry some valuable idea. No, no. Value is not set by the writer or even by the content, the ideas. Value is in the eye of the reader. The language that makes a startup founder sit up and pay attention is not the language that makes a Fortune 500 exec lean in and listen closely. even if you're making exactly the same point. Now, yes, there are some more universal words that span across genres with different reading communities which signal value. Those are words like but, however, although, and those are signs of instability and contrast, which is catnip for the curious brain. But if you want to establish value with your specific readers, then what you need are communityspecific code words. These are words that tell your reader, I know your world. I speak your language. I'm one of you and I'm talking specifically to you. And these code words are actually quite fun to go hunting for. So, this is something I always do with my clients, but hey, you can try it out yourself, which is whenever you are going to publish something, of course, take a close look at your readers, consider maybe there's a journal that they all read or maybe there is an article online that they've all been sharing, right? You're going to look at these almost like an anthropologist. You're going to look for these cultural artifacts that they share among themselves. And then in those documents, you scan it looking for these community specific code words. If you were to read the Harvard Business Review, you would find language like that. Strategy, uh, payoff, competitive advantage. But no matter your niche, you are writing to specific communities of readers. And for them to value your ideas, you need to produce that value using their in-group code words. And this is why writers who are agnostic about their audience and just trying to write for everybody never quite make it. Arthur's article became a classic, not just because the idea was good. Honestly, there are plenty of good ideas that just die away in obscurity. Arthur's article broke through because he and McCartney had X-ray vision on their audience. They knew exactly who those readers are, what they cared about, and what kept them up at night, and what words would light up their mental dashboard. And to find out how they did it, you need to watch this video next because it is my deep dive into this article by Arthur and McCartney. And not only is it going to give you some strategies that McCartney gave to Arthur when they were revising his draft, but it's also going to give you a concrete case study in expert writing. So, be sure to go check it out.
