TITLE: Writing Online Is Hard, Until Experts Do This
DATE: 20260208
URL: https://youtu.be/j1JRSan9CYg
SOURCE: en-orig

Are you struggling to engage readers with your essays, newsletters, and reports? Even though you're following all the rules of writing, most experts when they start writing online, they look for guidance from writing mavens, guide books, or even chat GBT. They follow generic advice, but their writing doesn't work. Meanwhile, you see thought leaders in your space go viral with poorly written slop, and you think, "How are they getting away with it?" Well, the reason is easy to see when you read these two sentences. As an English professor, let me tell you that these are my favorite sentences. Bees make honey and honey is made by bees. Which sentence is better? Well, if you ask these writing mavens, then they'll tell you that bees make honey is better. And their belief rests on two assumptions. Both of them are wrong. First, shorter sentences are better than longer ones. So, bees make honey is obviously shorter than honey is made by bees. And the second faulty assumption is active verbs are better than passive verbs. And if you know a little bit about grammar, then you know that this first sentence is written in the active voice and the second sentence is written in the passive voice. And it's this kind of thinking that holds so many experts back. If you're using writing professionally, maybe you're trying to build a personal brand or convert leads into customers, maybe you're trying to publish your research or just influence the conversation in your space through thought leadership content, then there are two big dangers with following these rules that you need to watch out for. And if you want to become a better writer, then you are going to love my free newsletter, Writer Science. Link is down below the like button. So, what are the two dangers of following this kind of rules-based writing advice? And how can you fix it? Well, for the first danger, consider what happens when readers read your sentence. They don't read it all at once. They proceed through it in time from left to right. So, they start off with bees. And it's like, "Okay, tell me about bees. What about bees?" And then they go on, "Well, bees make." All right. What do bees make? Oh, they make honey. So because readers are moving through your sentence from left to right, beginning to end, naturally they take whatever occurs at the beginning of the sentence to be the thing that the sentence tells a story about. That's why we call the position at the start of the sentence, the topic position. It's what the sentence is about. So, no matter which sentence is longer or which sentence uses passive verbs, readers perceive sentence one to be about bees and they perceive sentence two to be about honey. All right, but what's this got to do with which sentence is better? Well, just think about the readers of this sentence. What do they care about? Some readers can be different. Some of them care about bees and others care about honey. So, put yourself in the position of those different readers. Like imagine that you care about honey. That you want to know about honey. That's why you're reading. And then imagine that you're given a sentence about bees. This isn't what you care about. It's not what you want to know about. It's not what you want to read about. Now, if you do read the sentence, and let's be honest, you might not because you really don't care about bees. It's not what you came for. Then you need to work harder to find the information that matters to you. Like now you've read a sentence about bees, but you want to think about honey. So in order to think about what you care about, you've got to translate this sentence about bees into a sentence about honey. That translation process is a bit of extra work that makes the sentence seem less clear, less persuasive, and especially less valuable. So the question about which sentence is better is actually a question about which sentence is more valuable to your particular reader. So never mind what the writing mavens say. There are tons of situations in which honey is made by bees is the better sentence. And I know that comes as a shock to many people. So let's be really clear about this. Yes, this sentence is longer and yes it uses a passive verb. But it's a better sentence because it's a more valuable sentence to certain readers. So if you care about rules, then shorter is better or avoid passives is a neat and tidy rule. But if you care about readers, then the longer sentence with a passive verb may well be more clear, more organized, more persuasive, and most importantly, more valuable. So that's the first danger of rules-based writing advice. It results in writing that's not valuable to your readers. But before we get into the second danger of following rules-based writing advice, you've got to know how to fix it so you don't wind up making your writing worse by forcing readers to read about something that they don't care about. Whenever I work in my private consultancy with B2B founders, for example, they endlessly write to clients with sentences like, "This new feature permits businesses to da da da." And most founders who start working with me do so because they know that their writing isn't having the desired effect on their clients. Their writing follows all the rules, but it just doesn't work. But what they don't know is that all these writing rules about shorter sentences and passive verbs can actually be part of the problem rather than part of the solution. Without consciously deciding to do so, readers of English will take this to be a sentence about the new feature. But the number one rule of marketing is of course don't sell features, sell benefits. So almost certainly the client doesn't care about the feature, doesn't want to think about the feature, and doesn't want to read about the feature. Clients care about many things, but again, in this B2B space, it's a pretty solid bet that the client is a business, and what they care about is themsel. So clients will very likely find the sentence to be more clear and more valuable if the sentence allows them to think about what they care about. And a passive verb does this. When you use are permitted, it allows you to take business and move it over here to the topic position. Yes, it's longer and yes, it uses a passive verb, but it's more valuable to readers because it lets them think about what they care about. Or let's say you're writing a newsletter about finance like Ben Thompson. You have a sentence like seasonal volatility of intermediated consumption directly affects price dividend ratios. All right, so imagine that your readers are investors. They want to use price dividend ratios to make investment decisions. They only want to know about the volatility in so far as it relates to the thing that they care about, which is the ratios. So, a sentence is likely to seem more clear to them and crucially more valuable to them if what they care about is what the sentence is about. Or one more example from thought leadership. Here's Eric Reese, the author of the lean startup. Matt Mullenweg offered every automatic employee 6 months of salary to resign if they didn't believe in the company's direction. Now, I suppose it's possible that readers do want to know about Matt Mullen. But it's easy to imagine readers who don't primarily care about Mullenweg as well. But what they do care about is receiving six month salary. That is if they're the workforce or if the readers are more from company management, then you can imagine that those readers care about the company's direction and how to get employees to believe in it. So, in all cases, the fix couldn't be easier if you just let yourself do it. Just go ahead and use the sentence with more words and passive verbs if it helps your readers. Now, readers who want to think about honey are getting a sentence that gives them what they want. And so, the sentence seems more clear and more importantly more valuable. But how are you supposed to know what your readers want to read about? Now, you can usually make a pretty good guess about your readers. I mean, do you really think that your clients want to read about the new feature of your product? But often you can't know for sure. So, I'm using the word guess here because I realize that many experts find it stressful to have this uncertainty in their writing. So, one of the attractions of rules like avoid passive verbs or always write in shorter sentences is that rules create the illusion of certainty. I mean, if you've got a rule and you follow it, then at the very least, you're certain that you followed the rule. And of course, you can automate the execution of these rules to unthinking tools like AI. And to be totally forthcoming, I should just say that if thinking of writing as a matter of rules gets you to successful writing, then I don't want to meddle. If it ain't broke, don't fix it. Simply in the name of my commitment to a particular philosophy of language, which says that writing isn't a thing, it's a function. All right? So, the meaning of your writing doesn't exist in the text itself. the way that oxygen exists in water. Instead, meaning arises from what readers do when they engage with your writing. So, the text's meaning exists in the reader in how they use it, process it, apply to it, respond to it, and reject it. So, following the rules works for your readers, then carry on. But I do, however, want to meddle if you're telling other people to follow those rules. In my teaching and private consultations, I spend a lot of time showing experts that these writing mavens themselves very often don't apply the rules that they claim are rules. Now, the mavens will respond to this by saying, "Well, there are exceptions, of course, and those mavens have an alarm bell in their head that goes off when following a rule makes their writing worse." The trouble is that unlike those writing mavens, not everybody has those alarm bells. I mean most experts have devoted their time to developing domain expertise in their field. So they don't have time to also master all the intricacies of writing. So while writing rules may make it easier for the mavens to teach, they should be wary of imposing those rules on others because there are no writing rules. There are only writing tools. So how do you know what your readers want to think about? How do you know what to use as the subjects of your sentences? Well, you've got many ways to think about this, but here I'll just suggest that you consider how readers would phrase a question they heard about your writing. So, think backwards about what you've written. Take a sentence and then think of that sentence as the answer to a question. Then put that question into your reader's voice. How would the reader phrase that question? What would they use as the subject of that question? So take the sentence, Matt Mullenwig offered every automatic employee six months of salary to resign if they didn't believe in the company's direction. And now imagine this sentence as the answer to a question. How would your readers phrase that question? What would they use as the subject of their question? Some readers, especially if they're in management, might ask, "Can company loyalty be tested by offering employees salary to leave?" Well, in that case, the better sentence is commitment to the company's direction was tested by Matt Mullenweg, who offered every automatic employee who didn't believe in it 6 months of salary to resign. But if your readers are part of the workforce and they're more interested in salary, their question might be something like why was 6 months salary offered to the employees? to which a good answer would be six months of salary was offered by Matt Mullenweg to every automatic employee to resign if they didn't believe in the company's direction. Now honestly there are even a few readers who would ask what did Matt Mullenweg do? Like at specific moments in specific niches readers are interested in what other experts in their field have said. But even in these moments, you shouldn't assume that your readers care most about Matt Mullenwick. Very often, even when readers do want to know what someone else has said about a topic, they don't care who said it. So here, they may well care less about Mullenwag and much more about the salary or the company loyalty. In other words, they might not ask, "What did Matt Mullen do?" They might instead ask something like, "Did his offer work?" or did the employees take his offer? All right. Now, earlier I told you about the two dangers of rules like shorter is better and avoid passives. And one danger was that such a rule will cause a specific writing failure. That is following rules without creating value. But another deeper danger lies in the habit of thinking about your writing in terms of rules. That can be a deadly habit because it can get in your way of thinking about readers. If you are among the many experts for whom the rules of writing have been ingrained, then your habits cause you not to think about your particular readers for your particular text. Rules or these AI agents lead you to assume that all readers are the same. Shorter is better for all readers. active verbs are clearer for all readers and so on. But in my teaching and my private consulting, I bump into this problem all the time. I've worked with countless writers who are so trained in applying rules or outsourcing their thinking about writing to AI that they resist thinking about their specific readers. And for these writers, there's no point in thinking about your readers because the rules have already established what the writing should be like. And what's worse, these writers become downright suspicious of thinking about readers at all because the thinking pulls them away from what they know is true, which is the rules. And at that point, writing rules do indeed become dangerous because it stops your writing from performing its professional functions. The writing doesn't work. When your writing succeeds, it succeeds with particular readers, not because it follows generalized rules, especially when those rules are wrong. So, it's back to the bees and the honey. Some readers care about the bees and they want to read about the bees. Other readers care about the honey and they want to read about the honey. But keep in mind that this has been about the function of language for readers and about how you revise your writing for those specific readers. But writing serves writers and readers differently. And you shouldn't pay attention to any of this stuff during your first draft. So watch this video next because it's going to show you what to focus on instead during the first function of writing while you're using your writing to serve your own thinking. So, be sure to go check it out.
