TITLE: A.I. Mistakes Writers Must Stop Making
DATE: 20260723
URL: https://youtu.be/3kf9rRztJgA
SOURCE: en-orig

Yes, AI is ruining your writing, but not for the reason you think. I'm an English professor, and for the past 10 years, I've been helping people share their knowledge and expertise through clear, valuable writing. And as I've been watching this great AI writing debate play out, I've got to say, I think it misses something fundamental. So, in today's video, I want to go over the two AI writing workflows to show you what's wrong with incorporating AI at any stage of your writing process. And I promise you, this is not going to devolve into one of these cranky rants about how AI is corrupting the art form, or how my taste is better than yours. That's where I think a lot of this AI debate happens, and that's at the wrong level. It's at the surface level. So, instead, I want to go one step deeper to not only show you what's wrong with incorporating AI into your non-fiction writing, but also show you how to fix it so that you can show up as your best authentic self with your audience and deliver real value to them. And so, what do I mean when I say this debate is happening at the wrong level? Well, imagine this. The spirit that you bring to your writing should really be like the spirit that you would bring to a first date. You can't show up to a first date, you know, unshowered and monosyllabic and staring down at your phone. Not if you want a second date, that is. And if you do show up to a first date with the spirit of someone who really doesn't want to be there, then that's going to permeate through every surface level feature of that date. It's going to show up in the way that you present yourself. It's going to show up in your language choices. And no amount of editing at that surface level could rehabilitate that date and lead to a second one. That is, if you take somebody with the spirit of someone who really doesn't want to be there, and you dress them up in a nice shirt, or you put some cologne on, or you kind of coach them maybe with an earpiece telling them what to say, it really doesn't matter. The other person is going to sense that inauthenticity. They're going to be saying, "Why are you here? What do What do you want? Why are I thought we were here to meet each other, to communicate with each other?" All of this AI debate is so focused on that surface level. It's saying, "Don't use this sentence structure. Don't repeat this word. Avoid the M dash." Right? Like any of that is really going to make a difference. Like a first date, writing is about communication. And communication doesn't isn't a matter of just the words that we choose. It's a matter of the way that we show up for that other person. It's a meeting of the minds. And in communication, all the language choices that we make are downstream of the way that we choose to relate to that person. You might notice that in conversation, you're never thinking about the words that you're going to choose. You're never planning what sentence am I going to say next. They just kind of fall out of you in the course of that discussion. Now, of course, there are some obvious differences between speaking to somebody in conversation and writing. Of course, you know, when you're speaking, you're in the same room together, you're looking at each other, and with writing, you're separated by space and time. But there's still that fundamental upstream quality of relating to somebody and intending to communicate with somebody that gets lost in both of these AI workflows. So, what are the workflows? Well, the first workflow that you see in AI writing are people who take AI outputs and then try to dress them up as their own. So, you might go to your AI and say, "Give me three points about whatever the topic is." And it'll give you a certain output, and then the idea is that you can take that output and kind of make it your own. Move some sentences around and do your own stylistic edits, and that's supposed to make things all right. And that workflow, I think, is the source of so much of the inauthenticity that readers are complaining about with nonfiction writing these days. Now, the crude way to put this is to say that when you take AI outputs and then try to dress them up as your own, you're kind of polishing a turd. But, it's actually worse than that because at least with a turd, you would have some substance. The outputs of AI, by contrast, are not even as substantive as a turd because it's not an idea. If you know a little bit about how AI works, it's just a pattern recognition machine. It's taking words, converting them to numbers, running probability algorithms, and then converting those tokens back into words. It's a parlor trick. It's not an idea. And the thing about communicative writing and just communication in general is that whenever we're talking to somebody, we have a vision. So, you have a vision. In fact, I'm kind of doing it in this video. So, if you've been watching this channel for a while, you've seen different styles of videos that I've made, but this one is off the cuff. I I don't have a script. I don't have notes. I'm speaking to you as I would if we met for coffee. And the reason I'm doing this is to demonstrate the point that when you have something to say, it's almost as though you've seen something. The Consider the I'm I'm I'm thinking here of an idea almost as a vision. Like you've seen something. You know that something is true. And so you then relate to When you want to share that vision with somebody else, you don't plan out your sentences in advance. You don't have to because you have the vision in mind and you're looking at the other person in front of you and the words fall out of you in the course of describing that vision. Now, the same thing happens with quality writing. You have a vision. You You know something to be true and then you orient yourself properly to the person who you're writing to and the language just falls out of you. Now, by contrast, if you are taking AI outputs and then just trying to gussy them up with your own stylistic preferences, you're not beginning with that spirit. You don't have a vision that you're actually trying to articulate. You're just moving words around in this kind of parlor trick. And that's why AI writing always rings hollow. There's nothing to it. It's not even a turd because it's not an idea. It's like you have an object and you're sanding the edges of it, but the object itself is hollow. So if you take AI outputs and then try to pass them off as your own, you're not writing well because you're not actually communicating. No thought was had, no vision was seen, and so although words are coming out of your mouth or in the case of writing on the page, they're not indexing anything real inside of you, and so it's not authentic communication, and your reader sense that immediately. But I really don't think that point is quite so controversial within the great AI writing debate. I'm sure many of you would agree that yes, it's wrong or at least inauthentic for writers to take an AI output and then try to pass it off as their own just by changing the style or sentence structure or paragraph organization. We all hate that. But, there is a second AI workflow that I think is just as pernicious. And that workflow is the following. You take a pile of notes, messy disorganized notes. Maybe you do some free writing, maybe you even do a voice note, and you just kind of ramble into your phone about the topic for 5 or 10 minutes, and then you hand it off to AI and you ask it to clean it up. Now, if you think that's a legitimate way to go about writing, if you think that it's perfectly fine to hand off that version of AI writing to your readers, then I think there is something fundamental about writing that you don't understand. If you think that's true, then you think that writing style is an independent variable on top of substance. You have the substance in your messy notes, in your free associated of you know, voice transcript. That's That's your idea. And then you are just using AI to enhance the style. It's as though you're imagining writing style to be like a coat of paint that you can put over a messy substance. But, to show you why that's wrong and what happens when you do it that way, let me tell you a little story about when I moved to South Korea 12 or maybe 14 years ago now. I've lost count. Uh this was before the advent of food delivery apps. And so, whenever I wanted to get Korean chicken delivered to my house, I had a problem, which is that I would have to call the the chicken restaurant and give them my order over the phone. But, at that time, my Korean level wasn't I wasn't competent enough to do this. I I didn't know how to handle that kind of an order. And so, what I did was I memorized the sounds that I would have to make in order to make this order. I would call them up and I would just make the following sounds. "Go shoo ba sa sak sun sal bae dal ya chuseyo." I barely knew what that meant, but I practiced the sounds and once a week I would call my local chicken shop and I would make those sounds and if I pulled it off, 40 minutes later chicken would arrive at my door. But, sometimes there was a problem with that and that is whenever the owner had some clarifying question that they needed to ask me. Maybe they were out of that chicken or maybe they just wanted to confirm my address and I wouldn't know what they were saying back to me. And so, I would panic and hang up the phone and I don't know, maybe I would try again later or just walk to the store myself. But, I think that's a pretty good model of thinking about this version of the AI writing workflow. Because, when you are handing off a mess of notes to AI and then asking it to clean it up, what you get is the same kind of fluency without communication. When I called up the chicken restaurant, I sounded slick. I actually had the phonemes down pretty good. I I had the first language program that I ever did in Korean was one that was based on listen and repeat. And so, I really worked out the phonemes and I think whenever I do speak, I can sound quite fluent. However, I didn't have a deeper understanding of the language that would allow me to communicate if anything came up. And so, once again, my the spirit that I brought to that exchange was not one of communication. If the owner of the chicken restaurant spoke back to me, I couldn't elaborate. I couldn't continue because I wasn't really there to communicate. I was directing an order. And I think this is why so much AI writing is making people sound polished but hollow. They haven't done the work at the substance level to merit the kind of smooth, possible, plausible prose that comes out of the AI level. And they're not really two variables. You can't have smooth, polished prose if you haven't clarified the ideas at the substance level. In fact, they're they're not even separate levels. They're not independent of each other. And so, as you change one level, you distort the other. And you actually see this really clearly if you've ever played with AI image generators. So, try this yourself. Take an image of yourself and then have AI reproduce exactly that image of you, but maybe from a different angle. What But tell it to preserve all the features. Make it look exactly the same as you. What you'll find is that there's always a distortion of the original. The output that it gives you is plausible. It shares many of the same features that you gave it in that initial input, but there's always something quite off. Why is that? Well, it's because in this in this image generation model, it has not seen you 3D. It hasn't seen you from different perspectives over time. So, it doesn't know All it knows is the input that you've given it. So, it'll manipulate those inputs, but there's always some distortion. And the same thing happens with your writing. Whenever you give AI a mess of your thoughts and then ask it to improve those thoughts, it's never going to reproduce that thought because it never had that thought. All it had was the words that you gave it. And so, it's seeing your thought from a very limited, like, two-dimensional view. It hasn't considered your thought from another It's not even thoughts, it's just words. It's a parlor trick. So, in the same way that with these AI images, it always comes out distorted. Similarly, with your writing, it is not actually seeing the vision you had, the vision that you bring to communication. It It's not actually had that vision. It's not had the idea. It's only had the words that you used to index that idea. So, it's a very limited purview on the image that you're trying to communicate. And so, the output is always going to be distorted and limited. Good writing is a window onto the world. You're the writer. You've seen something in the world, and now, through your writing, you are curating a window and a frame around that. And you're asking the reader to, "Please, look. Look at this thing that I've seen so that you can see it, too." But when you take your ideas, and you ask AI to just spruce them up, what you're doing is you're having AI create that window. Now, the AI has not seen what you've seen in the world. It only sees the words that you use to index that vision. And so, the window that it creates for your reader is always going to be distorted. It's like a funhouse mirror, rather than a clear window, a clear windowpane onto the world. Now, to this, you might say, "Well, fine, but we can still preserve AI writing. All we need to do is give it more context. We need to have better prompts. We need to give it more context about the intended audience. We need to give it more context about the vision that we're trying to communicate. And I I about that I would say two things. So, one uh you might have heard of Laplace's demon. In case you haven't, this is a problem from physics, which basically says that if you know to a perfect mathematical certainty the current position of every atom in the universe, then you would be able to predict history because everything would be determined by the laws of physics. And so, on the one hand, I want to say, "Well, you can't give your AI perfect context because you'll never be able to provide it enough context to perfectly match the rhetorical situation of your text." But then a second point I want to say is that like if you're going to bother, if you're going to go through all this effort to try to give your AI all this context and and and everything that it needs in order to produce plausible prose, why don't you just do it yourself? Because at this point, you are you're actually showing up in a real communication event. You're just oriented to the wrong person. It's as though you're communicating with your AI. Like at this point of the debate where you're still trying to preserve everything about your AI, you're trying to say, "Okay, well, my AI is just it has this kind of mind and if I just give it this kind of context, then it'll produce the kind of language that I want." But to that I would say, "Why don't you just turn away from your AI and turn to your reader?" It's a lot easier and it's a lot more fulfilling because that's all readers are looking for. They're not looking for flashy prose or anything like that. They're looking for a meeting of the minds, meaningful communication, somebody showing up with a clear vision of something in the world that they've seen as true and that they want to share with somebody. And somebody who's taken the time to arrange their text in a way that will make sense to them. I think all of this comes down to spirit. The spirit that you bring to your writing. And if you are trying to outsource any stage of your own writing process to AI, then I think you've corrupted that spirit. Now, don't get me wrong. I use AI for all kinds of things. Just not communicative writing. One of the great functions of AI that I like to use is incorporating it into my second brain. I basically use AI as a navigation layer to help me sort through all the notes that I compile. And so if you want to learn my system for how I incorporated AI into my Obsidian second brain, then you can check out this video right here because it's going to give you a step-by-step tutorial about how to actually use AI in your writing. So be sure to go check it out.
